The Broken God


 Gene Wolfe declared Zindell as 'one of the finest talents to
appear since Kim Stanley Robinson and William Gibson – perhaps
the finest'. His first novel, Neverness was published to great
acclaim. A reviewer in the New Scientist wrote of it in 1992:
'David Zindell writes of interstellar mathematics in poetic
prose that is a joy to read'.

The Broken God, Book One of A Requiem for Homo Sapiens, is a
sequel to Neverness. It has been hailed as Dune for the 1990s
and was equally well-received: 'SF as it ought to be:
challenging, imaginative, thought-provoking and well-written.
Zindell has placed himself at the forefront of literary SF'.
Times Literary Supplement

The Wild, Book Two of A Requiem for Homo Sapiens was also
published to great acclaim: 'A disturbing vision of the
impending collapse of a transgalactic society ... the ideas are
hard SF with philosophical undertones, and the story is
compelling'. New Scientist

 Zindell has completed A Requiem for Homo Sapiens with War in
Heaven, available now, in hardback. He lives in Boulder,
Colorado.
BY THE SAME AUTHOR
Neverness
A Requiem for Homo Sapiens
 The Wild
 War in Heaven

Voyager


DAVID ZINDELL


The Broken God

BOOK ONE

      of A Requiem of Homo Sapiens


Voyager
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
77-85 Fulham Palace Road,
Hammersmith, London W6 8JB
The Voyager World Wide Web site address
 is http://www.harpercollins.co.uk/voyager
This paperback edition 1998
 135798642
Previously published in paperback by
HarperCollins Science Fiction & Fantasy 1993
First published in Great Britain by 1993
Copyright © David Zindell 1993
The Author asserts the moral right to
be identified as the author of this work
 ISBN 0 586 21189 6 Set in Meridien
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Caledonian International
Book Manufacturing Ltd, Glasgow
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior
permission of the publishers.
 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or
otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is
published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
PART ONE

Danlo the Wild




CHAPTER ONE

Shaida

All that is not halla, is shaida.
For a man to kill what he cannot eat, that is shaida;
For a man to kill an imakla animal that is shaida, too.
It is shaida for a man to die too soon;
It is shaida for a man to die too late.
Shaida is the way of the man who kills other men;
Shaida is the cry of the world when it has lost its soul.
 – from the Devaki Song of Life

   This is the story of my son, Danlo wi Soli Ringess. I came
to know him very well, though it was his fate (and my own) that
he grew up wild, a lost manchild living apart from his true
people. Until he came to Neverness, he knew almost nothing of
his heritage or the civilized ways of the City of Light; in
truth, he did not really know he was a human being. He thought
of himself as an Alaloi, as one of that carked race of men and
women who live on the icy islands west of Neverness. His
adoptive brothers and sisters bore the signature of chromosomes
altered long ago; they each had strong, primal faces of jutting
browridges and deep-set eyes; their bodies were hairy and
powerful, covered with the skins of once-living animals; they
were more robust and vital, and in many ways much wiser, than
modern human beings. For a time, their world and Danlo's were
the same. It was a world of early morning hunts through frozen
forests, a world of pristine ice and wind and sea birds
flocking in white waves across the sky. A world of variety and
abundance. Above all, it was a world
7
of halla, which is the Alaloi name for the harmony and beauty
of life. It was Danlo's tragedy to have to learn of halla's
fragile nature at an early age. Had he not done so, however, he
might never have made the journey home to the city of his
origins, and to his father. Had he not made the journey all men
and women must make, his small, cold world and the universe
which contains it might have known a very different fate.
  Danlo came to manhood among Alaloi's Devaki tribe, who lived
on the mountainous island of Kweitkel. It had been the Devaki's
home for untold generations, and no one remembered that their
ancestors had fled the civilized ruins of Old Earth thousands
of years before. No one remembered the long journey across the
cold, shimmering lens of the galaxy or that the lights in the
sky were stars. No one knew that civilized human beings called
their planet 'Icefall'. None of the Devaki or the other tribes
remembered these things because their ancestors had wanted to
forget the shaida of a universe gone mad with sickness and war.
They wanted only to live as natural human beings in harmony
with life. And so they had carked their flesh and imprinted
their minds with the lore and ways of Old Earth's most ancient
peoples, and after they were done, they had destroyed their
great, silvery deepship. And now, many thousands of years
later, the Devaki women gathered baldo nuts to roast in wood
fires, and the men hunted mammoths or shagshay or even Totunye,
the great white bear. Sometimes, when the sea ice froze hard
and thick, Totunye came to land and hunted them. Like all
living things, the Devaki knew cold and pain, birth and joy and
death. Death – was it not a Devaki saying, as old as the cave
in which they lived, that death is the left hand of life? They
knew well and intimately almost everything about death: the cry
of Nunki, the seal, when the spear pierces his heart; the
wailing of an old woman's death song; the dread silence of the
child who dies in the night. They knew the natural death that
makes
8
room for more life, but about the evil that comes from nowhere
and kills even the strongest of the men, about the true nature
of shaida, they knew nothing.
  'When Danlo was nearly fourteen years old, a terrible illness
called the 'slow evil' fell upon the Devaki. One day, during
deep winter, the men and women sickened all at once with a
mysterious, frothing fever. It was a fever that stole away
sense and lucidity, leaving its hosts paralysed and leaking
fluids from the ears. Of all the tribe, only Danlo and one
strange man named Three-Fingered Soli remained untouched. It
fell to them to hunt and prepare the food, to melt snow for
drinking water, to keep the oilstones burning so there might be
a little light to warm the sick inside their snow huts. Danlo
and Three-Fingered Soli loved their near-brothers and sisters
as they loved life, and for six days they worked like madmen to
perform the hundreds of little daily devotions necessary to
keep their tribe from going over too soon. But since there were
eighty-eight Devaki and only two of them, it was an impossible
task. Slowly – for the Alaloi are a tenacious, stubborn people
– slowly Danlo's tribe began to die. His near-sister, Cilehe,
was one of the first to make the journey to the other side of
day. And then his near-fathers Wemilo and Choclo died, and Old
Liluye and many others. Soon the cave was full of rotting
bodies waiting to be buried. Danlo tried to ignore them, even
though, for the Devaki, the care of the dead is nearly as
important as that of the living. He lavished his energies on
his found-father, Haidar, and on Chandra, the only woman he had
ever known as a mother. He made blood-tea and dribbled the
thick, lukewarm liquid down their throats; he rubbed hot seal
oil on their foreheads; he prayed for their spirits; he did
everything he could to keep them from going over. But to no
avail. At last, the slow evil stole them from life. Danlo
prayed and wept, and he left their hut intending to go outside
the cave to find some fireflowers to put on their grave. But he
was so exhausted that he tripped into a
9
snowdrift and fell at once into a deep, dreamless sleep. Later
that day, Three-Fingered Soli found him there, covered with
layers of fresh new snow.
   'Danlo,' Soli said as he brushed the sparkling soreesh from
the boy's furs, 'wo lania-ti? Are you all right?'
  'I was just sleeping, sir,' Danlo said. 'Mi talu los
wamorashu. I was so tired.' He rubbed his eyes with his
powdered mittens. Even sitting in the snow, he was tall for a
boy thirteen years old; he was taller, leaner and more angular
than any of his near-brothers. In truth, he did not look like
an Alaloi at all. He had the long nose and bold face bones of
his father. His eyes were his mother's eyes, dark blue like
liquefied jewels, and even though he was very tired, they were
full of light. In almost any city of the Civilized Worlds, his
fellow human beings would have found him fiercely handsome. But
he had never seen a true human being, and he thought of himself
as being different from his near-brothers. Not exactly ugly,
but rather strange and delicately deformed, as if he were a
thallow born into a nest of sparrowhawks.
   'You should not sleep in the snow,' Soli said as he brushed
back his grey and black hair. Like most Alaloi men, he was
large and muscular. Today, he was very tired. His shoulders
were slumped, and there was a faraway, broody look about his
eyes. He seemed very worried. 'Only dogs sleep in the snow.'
   'But, sir, I was only going to pick fireflowers,' Danlo
said. 'I do not know what happened.'
'You might have slept too long and never awakened.'
  Soli pulled him to his feet. They were standing near the
mouth of the cave. Thirty feet away, the sled dogs of twelve
families were tied to their stakes in the snow; they were
pulling at their leashes, whining, begging for their evening
meal. Danlo couldn't remember the last time he had fed them. He
couldn't remember the last time he had fed himself. It was late
afternoon and the sun was low in the sky. The air was blue
cold, as clear as silka, the new ice. He
10
  looked out over the valley below the cave. The forest was
already lost in shadows of dark green and grey – tomorrow, he
thought, he might hunt shagshay, but tonight the dogs would go
hungry again.
  'Haidar and Chandra have gone over,' Danlo said. He looked at
Soli.
'Yes, they were the last.'
  'Haidar and Chandra,' Danlo repeated, and he wiped a clump of
melting snow away from his forehead. And then he said a prayer
for his found-parents' spirits: 'Haidar eth Chandra, mi
alasharia la shantih Devaki.'
 Soli rubbed his nose with his three-fingered hand and said,
'Shantih, shantih.'
 'And Sanya,' Danlo said, 'and Mahira, they have gone over,
too.'
'Shantih,' Soli said.
'And Irisha, Yukio and Jemmu – all alasharu.'
'Shantih.'
 'And Rafael, Choclo and Anevay. And Mentina, they have all
made the great journey.'
'Yes,' Soli said, 'Shantih.'
'They are all dead.'
'Yes.'
 'Ten days ago, all alive and fat with life, even Old Anala,
and now– '
 'Do not speak of it. Words are only words – there is no
purpose.'
   Danlo took off his mittens and pressed his eyes; the hot
water there burned his cold thumbs. 'I am so tired,' he said.
And then, The blessed Devaki – the whole tribe, sir. How can
this be?'
Soli turned his face to the north, saying nothing.
 Danlo followed his gaze outward, upward to where the pointed
summit of Kweitkel rose above them. It was a great shining
mountain marbled in granite and ice, a god watching over them.
Four thousand years ago the first Devaki had named the island
after the mountain forming
11
its centre. Generation upon generation of Danlo's ancestors
were buried here. He closed his eyes as the wind came up and
whipped his hair wildly about his head. There was ice in the
wind, the smell of pine needles, salt, and death. 'Kweitkel,
shantih,' he whispered. Soon he must bury his people in the
graveyard above the cave, and after that, the Devaki would be
buried on Kweitkel no longer.
   'It was bad luck,' Soli said at last, rubbing the thick
brows of his forehead. 'Yes, bad luck.'
 'I think it was shaida,' Danlo said. 'It is shaida for our
people to die too soon, yes?'
'No, it was just bad luck.'
 Danlo held his hand over his forehead to keep his hair from
lashing into his eyes. He had thick black hair shot with
strands of red. 'In all the stories Haidar told over the
oilstones, in all your stories, too, I have never heard of a
whole tribe going over all at once. I never thought it was
possible. I... never thought. Where has this shaida come from?
What is wrong with the world that everyone could die like this?
"Shaida is the cry of the world when it has lost its soul" –
why is the world crying of shaida, sir?'
   Soli put his arm around him, and touched his head. Danlo
wept freely, then, wept for a long time into Soli's stiff,
frozen furs until a cold thought sobered him. He was only
thirteen years old, but among the Devaki, thirteen is almost
old enough to be a man. He looked at Soli, whose icy blue eyes
were also full of tears. 'Why us, Soli? Why didn't the slow
evil carry us over, too?'
 Soli looked down at the ground. 'It was luck,' he said. 'Just
bad luck.'
   Danlo heard the pity and pain in Soli's voice, and it
carried him close to despair. Soli, too, was ready for death.
Anyone, even a child could see that. There was madness and
death in his eyes and all over his haggard, grey face. The wind
blowing through the forest and over the icy boulders all around
them was very cold, almost dead cold, and Danlo felt like dying
himself. But he couldn't let himself
12
 die because he loved life too much. Wasn't it shaida to die
too soon? Hadn't he seen as much of shaida as he could bear?
He blew on his chilled, purple fingers and put his mittens
back on. Yes, he must live because it was not time for him to
go over yet, he was still young and full of life, still just a
boy who suddenly knew that he had to find an answer to shaida.
 He looked into the cave, at the great, black gash in the side
of the hill where Jonath and his other near-brothers lay
entombed. 'It is strange that the slow evil did not take me,
yes? Perhaps the slow evil is afraid of wildness. I have
always been a little wild, I think. Haidar used to say I was
wild, with all my talk of driving a sled east into the
sunrise. He used to say I listened to you too much. When I was
a boy– '
'Shhh, you talk too much.'
'But I have to ask you this, sir; I must know a thing.'
'What is that?'
 'When I was a boy, I wanted to find the bed of Sawel from
where he arises each morning to light the world. Pure wildness,
as Haidar always warned. Tell me, sir, you must know – was I
born with this wild face? My face is so different than the
faces of my brothers. And they were so much stronger and
hardier in their bodies; they never seemed to feel the cold.
Why did they go over and not I?'
Soli looked at him and said, 'It was fate. Just blind fate.'
   Danlo was disturbed by the way Soli spoke of fate. There was
galia, he knew, the World-soul, and one could certainly speak
of the wilu-galia, the intention of the World-soul, but how
could the World-soul be blind? No, he thought, only people or
animals (or God, himself) could be blind. As Haidar had taught
him, he shut his eyes again and breathed frigid air to clear
his inner sight. He tried to askeerawa wilu-galia, to see the
intention of the World-soul, but he could not. There was only
darkness in front of him, as deep and black as a cave without
light. He opened his eyes; the cold needles of wind made him
blink. Could it
13
be that Haidar had told him and the other children false
stories about the animals, about the birth and life of the
World? Could it be that everything he knew was wrong? Perhaps
only full men were able to see that the World-sours intention
was shaida; perhaps this was what Soli meant by blind fate.
   'It is cold,' Soli said, stamping his feet. 'It is cold and
I am tired.'
 He turned to step toward the cave and Danlo followed him. He,
too, was tired, so tired that his tendons ached up and down his
limbs and he felt sick in his belly, as if he had eaten bad
meat. For thirteen years of his life, ever since he could
remember, entering the cave from the outside world had always
been a moment full of warmth, certitude, and quiet joy. But now
nothing would ever be the same again, and even the familiar
stones of the entranceway – the circular, holy stones of white
granite that his ancestors had set there – were no comfort to
him. The cave itself was just as it had been for a million
years: a vast lava tube opening into the side of the mountain;
it was a natural cathedral of gleaming obsidian, flowing rock
pendants hanging from ceiling to floor, and deep silences. Now,
in the cave of his ancestors, there was too much silence and
too much light. While Danlo had slept in the snow, Soli had
gathered faggots of bonewood and placed them at fifty-foot
intervals around the cave walls. He had set them afire. The
whole of the cave was awash with light, flickering orange and
ruby lights falling off the animal paintings on the walls,
falling deep into the cave's dark womb where the cold floor
rose up to meet the ceiling. Danlo smelled woodsmoke, pungent
and sweet, and the firelight itself was so intense it seemed to
have a fragrance all its own. And then he smelled something
else layered beneath the smells of wood, fur, and snow.
Touching every rock and crack of the cave, all around him and
through him, was the stench of death. Though he breathed
through his mouth and sometimes held his breath, he could not
14
escape this terrible stench. The bodies of the dead were
everywhere. All across the snow-packed floor, his near-brothers
and sisters lay together in no particular order or pattern, a
heap of bent arms, hair, furs, rotting blood, thick Mack
beards, and dead eyes. They reminded Danlo of a shagshay herd
driven off a cliff. Leaving them inside their snowhuts until
burial would have been less work, but Soli had decided to move
them. The huts, the fifteen domes built of shaped snow blocks
in the belly of the cave, had kept the bodies too warm. The
smell of rotting flesh was driving the dogs mad and howling
with hunger, and so Soli had dragged the bodies one by one to
the cave's centre where they might freeze. Danlo worried that
Soli, tired as he was, might have left someone inside one of
the snowhuts by mistake. He told Soli of this worry, and Soli
quickly counted the bodies; there were eighty-eight of them,
the whole of the Devaki tribe. Danlo thought it was wrong to
count his kin one by one, to assign abstract numerals to human
beings who had so recently breathed air and walked over the
brilliant icefields of the world. He knew that each of them had
a proper name (except, of course, for the babies and very
little children who were known simply as 'son of Choclo' or
'Mentina's Second Daughter'), and he knew the names of each of
them, and he stood over the dead calling their names. 'Sanya,'
he said, 'Yukio, Choclo, Jemmu ... ' After a while his voice
grew thin and dry, and he began to whisper. Finally, he grew as
silent as Soli, who was standing beside him. He couldn't see
the faces of everyone to say their names. Some of the dead lay
face down, half buried in the snow. Others – usually they were
babies – were covered by the bodies of their mothers. Danlo
walked among the dead, looking for the man he called his
father. He found Haidar next to Chandra, the woman who had
adopted him when he was a newborn only a few moments old. They
were lying together, surrounded by Cilehe, Choclo and Old
Liluye, and others of their family. Haidar was a short man,
though
15
remarkably broad and muscular; he had always been remarkably
patient, canny and kind, and Danlo could not understand how
such a great man had so inexorably died. In death, with his
anima passed from his lips, Haidar seemed smaller and
diminished. Danlo knelt beside him, between him and Chandra.
Haidar's hand was stretched out, resting across Chandra's
forehead. Danlo took Haidar's hand in his own. It was a huge
hand, but there was no strength there, no tone or vitality. It
was as cold as meat, almost cold enough to begin hardening up
like ice. Chandra's face was cold, too. The hair around her
ears was crusted with layers of a pale red fluid. Some of this
fluid had dried days before; the freshest, the blood of her
death agony scarcely hours old, was now beginning to freeze.
Danlo combed the thick hair away from her forehead and looked
at her lovely brown eyes, which were open and nearly as hard as
stones. There was nothing in her eyes, neither joy nor light
nor pain. That was the remarkable thing about death, Danlo
thought, how quickly pain fled the body along with its anima.
He turned and touched Haidar's cold forehead, then, and he
closed his own eyes against the tears burning there. He wanted
to ask Haidar the simplest of questions: why, if death was so
peaceful and painless, did all living things prefer life to
death?
 'Danlo, it is time to ice the sleds.' This came from Soli,
who was standing above him, speaking gently.
'No,' Danlo said, 'not yet.'
   'Please help me with the sleds – we still have much to do.'
   'No.' Danlo sat down on the cave floor, and he rested one
hand over Haidar's eyes, the other over Chandra's. 'Haidar,
alasharia la shantih,' he said. And then, 'Chandra, my Mother,
go over now in peace.'
 'Quiet now,' Soli said, and he ruffled Danlo's hair. There
will be time for praying later.'
'No.'
'Danlo!'
16
'No!'
   Soli shrugged his shoulders and stared into the depths of
the cave where the firelight reflected off the shiny black
walls. His voice sounded low and hollow as he said, The sleds
have to be iced. Join me outside when you are done, and we will
bury the Devaki.'
   That evening, they began burying their tribe. They worked as
quickly as they could, stripping the bodies naked and rubbing
them with seal grease from toe to forehead. Danlo knew that it
would be cold on their spirits' journey to the other side of
day, and the grease would help against the cold. Loading the
bodies on the sleds and hauling them up to the burial grounds
above the cave was gruesome, exhausting work. Some of his
near-sisters had died many days earlier, and their flesh had
run dark and soft as rotten bloodfruit. It would have been less
horrible to remove the bodies all at once and place them in the
snowdrifts where they would freeze hard and fast. But there
were bears in the forest and packs of wolves; as it was, they
had to gather bunches of dead wood to keep the cave's entrance
fires burning, to keep the wild animals at bay. Of course the
sled dogs were familiar with fire, and they had little fear of
it. And so Danlo and Soli decided to spend a couple of days
hunting shagshay while most of their people awaited burial.
They had to flay the great, white, fleecy animals and cut them
up for food, or else the starving dogs might have gnawed off
their leashes and gone sniffing for carrion in the cave. After
that, they returned to work. One by one, they placed the bodies
on the icy, treeless burial field. They oriented them with
their heads to the north.
 They heaped boulders atop each body; they built many stone
pyramids to keep the animals away and to remind them that each
living thing must return to the earth from which it is born.
Their labour took ten days. There were too few boulders close
to the cave, so they had to tie the dogs to their traces and
drive sleds down through the forest to an icy stream where they
found many smooth, rounded
17
rocks. And then back up to the burial ground again with sleds
full of rocks, back and forth for many trips. When they were
finished at last, they found some anda bushes and picked orange
and red fireflowers to place atop the graves. And then they
prayed for the dead, prayed until their voices fell hoarse and
their tears were frozen sheets over their cheeks; they prayed
far into the night until the cold off the sea ice chilled their
bones.
 'Mi alasharia,' Danlo said one last time, and he turned to
Soli. 'It is done, yes?'
   They began walking down through the dark graves, down
through the snowdrifts and the swaying yu trees. There were
stars in the sky, and everywhere snow covered the forest. After
a while they came to the stream where they had built a little
snowhut to live in while they did their work. Never again would
they sleep in the cave. 'What will we do now?' Danlo asked.
 'Tomorrow, we will hunt again,' Soli said. 'We will hunt and
eat and continue to pray.'
   Danlo was quiet while he stared at the cold snowhut that
would provide shelter for a night, or perhaps many nights. And
then he said, 'But, sir, what will we do?'
 They crawled through the tunnel of the hut. The tunnel was
dark and icy, and barely wide enough to allow Soli passage. The
main chamber was larger, though not so large that either of
them could stand up without breaking through the top of the
little snow dome. In the half-darkness, Danlo moved carefully
lest he knock against the snow blocks that formed the hut's
walls. He spread his sleeping furs atop his bed of hard-packed
snow. Soli added chunks of seal blubber to the oilstone, a bowl
of scooped stone which was always kept burning, however
faintly. The blubber melted and caught fire, and Danlo gazed at
the small pearly flame floating on a pool of dark oil. Soon the
curved white walls of the hut glowed with a warm, yellow light.
'Yes, what to do now,' Soli said. The oilstone grew
18
hotter, and he began boiling water in a small clay pot. It was
his habit to drink some blood-tea before sleeping.
   Danlo thought he was a strange man, at heart a wild man like
himself, or rather, like he would be if he ever became a man.
He felt an affinity to this wildness. Hadn't Soli's
great-great-grandfather left the tribe a few generations ago to
journey across the southern ice? Hadn't Soli and his now-dead
family returned from the fabled Blessed Isles with fantastic
stories of air so warm that the snow fell from the sky as
water? It was told that Soli had once journeyed across the
eastern ice to the Unreal City where the shadow-men lived in
mountainous stone huts. Danlo wondered if these stories were
true, just as he wondered at the secret, wild knowledge of
numbers and circles that Soli had taught him. He thought Soli
was a mysterious, wild man, and then a startling idea came to
him: perhaps this is why the slow evil had avoided him, too.
   Danlo scooped some frozen seal blood out of a skin and
dumped the blackish, crystalline mass into Soli's pot. He said,
'We will have to journey west to Sawelsalia or Rilril, won't
we? We have many far-cousins among the Patwin, I have heard it
said. Or perhaps the Olorun – which of the tribes do you think
will welcome us, sir?'
   He felt uncomfortable talking so much because it was
unseemly for a boy to talk so freely in front of a man. But he
was uncertain and afraid for the future, and in truth, he had
always liked to talk. Especially with Soli: if he didn't
initiate conversation, Soli was likely to remain as silent as a
stone.
   After a long time, Soli said, To journey west – that may not
be wise.' He took a long drink of blood-tea. Danlo watched him
hold his cup up to his mouth; it seemed that his eyes were
hooded in steam off the tea, and in secretiveness.
'What else can we do?'
'We can remain here on Kweitkel. This is our home.'
Danlo held his hand to his eyes and swallowed hard
19
against the lump in his throat; it felt like a piece of meat
was stuck there. 'No, sir, how can we remain here? There are no
women left to make our clothes; there are no more girls to grow
into wives. There is nothing left of life, so how can we
remain?'
   While Soli sipped his tea silently, Danlo continued, 'It is
wrong to let life end, yes? To grow old and never have
children? To let it all die – isn't that shaida, too?'
'Yes, life, shaida,' Soli said finally. 'Shaida.'
   Something in the way Soli stared into his tea made Danlo
feel a sharp pain inside, over his liver. He worried that Soli
secretly blamed him for bringing shaida to their tribe. Was
such a thing possible, he wondered? Could he, with his strange
young face and his wildness, bring the slow evil to the Patwin
tribe as well? He felt shame at these thoughts, then, felt it
deep in his chest and burning up behind his eyes. He tried to
speak, but for once, his voice had left him.
   Soli stirred his lukewarm tea with his forefinger. The two
fingers next to it were cut off; the scars over the knuckle
stumps were white and shiny. To the east,' he said at last, 'is
the Unreal City. Some call it the City of Light, or ...
Neverness. We could go there.'
   Danlo had slumped down into his furs; he was as tired as a
boy could be and still remain among the living. But when he
heard Soli speak of the mythical Unreal City, he was suddenly
awake. He was suddenly aware of his heart beating away as it
did when he was about to spear a charging shagshay bull. He sat
up and said, The Unreal City! Have you really been there? Is it
true that shadow-men live there? Men who were never born and
never die?'
 'All men die,' Soli said softly. 'But in the Unreal City,
some men live almost forever.'
   In truth, Soli knew all about the Unreal City because he had
spent a good part of his life there. And he knew everything
about Danlo. He knew that Danlo's blood parents were really
Katharine the Server and Mallory
20
Ringess, who had also lived in the City. He knew these things
because he was Danlo's true grandfather. But he chose not to
tell Danlo the details of his heritage. Instead, he sipped his
tea and cleared his throat. And then he said, There is
something you must know. Haidar would have told you next year
when you became a man, but Haidar has gone over, and now there
is no one left to tell you except me.'
 Outside the hut, the wind was blowing full keen, and Danlo
listened to the wind. Haidar had taught him patience; he could
be patient when he had to be, even when the wind was blowing
wild and desperately, even when it was hard to be patient.
Danlo watched Soli sipping his tea, and he was sure that
something desperately important was about to be revealed.
   'Haidar and Chandra,' Soli forced out, 'were not your blood
parents. Your blood parents came from the Unreal City. Came to
the tribe fifteen years ago. Your mother died during your
birth, and Haidar and Chandra adopted you. That is why you are
different from your brothers and sisters. Most men of the City
look as you do, Danlo.'
   Danlo's throat ached so badly he could barely speak. He
rubbed his eyes and said simply, 'My blood parents ... There
are others who look like me, yes?'
 'Yes, in the Unreal City. It is not shaida to have a face
such as yours; you did not bring this shaida to our people.'
 Soli's explanation cooled Danlo's shame of being left alive.
But it brought to mind a hundred other questions. 'Why did my
blood parents come to Kweitkel? Why? Why wasn't I born Devaki
as all Devaki are born? Why, sir?'
'You don't remember?'
 Danlo shut his burning eyes against the oilstone's light. He
remembered something. He had an excellent memory, in some ways
a truly remarkable memory. He had inherited his mother's
'memory of pictures': when he closed his eyes, he could conjure
up in exact colour and contour almost every event of his life.
Once, two winters
21
ago, against Haidar's warnings, he had rashly gone out to hunt
silk belly by himself. A silk belly boar had found him in a
copse of young shatterwood trees; the boar had charged and laid
open his thigh with his tusk before Danlo could get his spear
up. He was lucky to be alive, but it wasn't his luck that he
most remembered. No, what he saw whenever he thought about that
day was Chandra's fine needlework as she sewed shut his wound.
He could see the bone needle pulling through the bloody,
stretched-out skin, the precision stitching, each loop of the
distinctive knot Chandra used to tie off his wound. Inside him
was a whole universe of such knots of memories, but for some
reason, he had almost no memory of the first four years of his
life. Somewhere deep inside there was a faint image of a man, a
man with piercing blue eyes and a sad look on his face. He
couldn't bring the image to full clarity, though; he couldn't
quite see it.
 He opened his eyes to see Soli staring at him. He drew his
furs up around his naked shoulders. 'What did my father look
like?' he asked. 'Did you know my father? My mother? The mother
of my blood?'
   Soli sipped the last of his tea and bent to pour himself
another cup. 'Your father looked like you,' he said. Then his
face fell silent as if he were listening to something, some
animal cry or sound far away. 'Your father, with his long nose,
and the hair – he never combed his hair. Yes, the wildness,
too. But you have your mother's eyes. She could see things
clearly, your mother.'
 'You must have known them very well, if they lived with the
tribe. Haidar must have known them, too.'
   Danlo closed his eyes again and tried to shut out the wind
whispering just beyond the snow blocks above his head. Inside
him, there were other sounds, other whispers. He remembered the
way Choclo and some of the other men would sometimes look at
him strangely, the way their voices would drop into whispers
whenever he surprised them in some dark corner of the cave. He
had always
22
imagined that everyone was talking about him when he wasn't
there to listen. There were darker memories, too: He had once
overheard Chandra and Ayame talking about a satinka, a witch
who had worked her evil and brought shaida to her people. He
had thought the story was of the dreamtime, the time of the
ancestors, the eternal, indestructible time that was at once
the history and the communal dreaming state of his people. He
must have been wrong, he thought. Perhaps there had been a
real satinka in the tribe. Perhaps this satinka had bewitched
his blood mother and father.
'Yes, Haidar knew your blood parents,' Soli admitted.
'Then what were their names? Why didn't he tell me?'
   'He would have told you when you became a man, during your
passage. There is more to the story, things a boy should not
have to think about.'
 'I am almost a man,' Danlo said. The set of his face was at
once open and pained, innocent and hard. 'Now that Haidar is
dead, you must tell me.'
 'No, you are not a man yet.'
   With his long fingernails, Danlo scraped frost off the ruff
of his sleeping furs. He tried to make out his reflection in
the glazed hut walls above him, but all he could see was his
shadow, the outline of his face and wild hair darkening the
milky white snow. 'I am almost a man, yes?'
   'Next deep winter, after your passage, then you will be a
man.' Soli yawned and then said, 'Now it is time to sleep. We
must hunt tomorrow, or we will starve and join the rest of the
tribe on the other side.'
   Danlo thought hard for a while. He had a naturally keen mind
made all the keener by the mind tools Soli had given him in
secret. Ever since he could remember, Soli had taken him alone
into the forest to draw figures in the hard-packed snow. He had
taught him geometry; he had taught him about things called
spheres and strange attractors and the infinities. Proof
structures and topology, and above all the beautiful,
crystalline logic which ordered the
23
 universe of number. Logic – even though Danlo found it a
strange and wild way of thinking, he loved to argue logically
with Soli.
 He held his hand up to his mouth to cover a smile, then said,
The journey across the eastern ice to the Unreal City will be
long and hard, yes?'
'Yes,' Soli said. 'Very hard.'
   'Even a man might not complete such a journey – Totunye, the
bear, may hunt him, or the Serpent's Breath might strike him
and kill him with cold, or– '
'Yes, the journey will be dangerous,' Soli broke in.
   'What if I were left alone to find the City?' Danlo asked
softly. 'Or if the slow evil found you at last out on the ice?
What if the shadow-men in the Unreal City do not know halla?
Maybe the shadow-men would kill you for your meat. If you died
before my passage, sir, how would I ever become a man?'
   For Danlo, as for every Alaloi boy, the initiation into
manhood is the third most important of life's transformations
and mysteries, the other two being birth and death.
 Soli rubbed his temples and sighed. He was very tired but he
must have clearly seen the logic of Danlo's argument, that he
would have to make his passage a year before his time. He
smiled at him and said, 'Do you think you are ready, Danlo?
You are so young.'
 'I am almost fourteen.'
 'So young,' Soli repeated. 'Even fifteen years is sometimes
too young. The cutting is very painful, and there have been
many boys older than you who were not ready for the pain of
the knife. And then, after the cutting ...' He let his voice
die off and looked at Danlo.
 'And then there is the secret knowledge, yes? The Song of the
Ancestors?'
 'No, after the pain, there is terror. Sheer terror.'
   He knew that Soli was trying to frighten him, so he smiled
to hide his fear. The air inside the hut was steamy from the
boiling tea and from their rhythmic exhalations;
24
it was selura, wet cold – not as absolutely cold as white cold,
but cold enough to lap at his skin like a thirsty seal and make
him shiver slightly. He pulled himself down into his furs,
trying to keep warm. All his life, from the older boys and
young men, he had heard rumours about the passage into manhood.
It was like dying, Choclo had once said, dying transcendently,
ur-alashara; it was like going over, not to the other side of
day, but going over oneself to find a new, mysterious world
within. He thought about what it would be like to go over, and
he tried to sleep, but he was too full of death and life, too
full of himself. All at once, his whole body was shivering
beyond his control. He had an overwhelming sense that his life,
every day and night, would be supremely dangerous, as if he
were walking a snowbridge over a crevasse. He felt wild and fey
in anticipation of making this eternal crossing. And then, deep
inside, a new knowledge sudden and profound: he loved the dark,
wild part of himself as he loved life. Ti-miura halla, follow
your love, follow your fate – wasn't this the teaching of a
hundred generations of his people? If he died during his
passage, died to himself or died the real death of blood and
pain, he would die in search of life, and he thought this must
be the most halla thing a man could do.
 The shivering stopped, and he found himself smiling
naturally. 'Isn't terror just the left hand of fate?' he asked.
'Will you take me through my passage tomorrow, sir?'
 'No, tomorrow we shall hunt shagshay. We shall hunt, then eat
and sleep to regain our strength.'
'And then?'
   Soli rubbed his nose and looked at him. 'And then, if you
are strong enough and keep your courage, you will become a
man.'
 Four days later, at dusk, they strapped on their skis and
made the short journey to Winter Pock, a nearby hill where the
Devaki men held their secret ceremonies. Danlo was not allowed
to speak, so he skied behind Soli in silence.
25
 As he planted his poles and pushed and glided through the
snow, he listened to the sounds of the forest: the loons
warbling with bellies full of yu berries; the clicking of the
sleekits halfway out of their burrows, warning each other that
danger was near; the wind keening across the hills, up through
the great yu trees heavy with snow. It was strange the way he
could hear the wind far off before he could feel it stinging
his face. He listened for Haidar's rough voice in the wind, and
the voices of his other ancestors, too. But the wind was just
the wind; it was only the cold, clean breath of the world. He
hadn't yet entered into the dreamtime, where his mother's dying
plaints and the moaning of the wind would be as one. He smelled
sea ice and pine needles in the wind; as the light failed and
the greens and reds bled away from the trees, the whole forest
was rich with the smells of the freezing night and with life.
 In silence, they climbed up the gentle slopes of Winter Pock.
The hill was treeless and barren at the top, like an old man
whose hair has fallen off the crown of his head. Set into the
snow around a large circle were wooden stakes. Each stake was
topped with the skull of a different animal. There were a
hundred different skulls: the great, tusked skull of Tuwa, the
mammoth; the skulls of Nunki and long, pointed skulls of the
snow fox and wolf; there were many, many smaller skulls, those
of the birds, Ayeye, the thallow, and Gunda and Rakri, and
Ahira, the snowy owl. Danlo had never seen such a sight in all
of his life, for the boys of the tribe were not allowed to
approach Winter Pock. In the twilight, the circle of
greyish-white skulls looked ominous and terrifying. Danlo knew
that each man, after his cutting, would look up at the skulls
to find his doffel, his other-self, the one special animal he
would never again hunt. His doffel would guide him into the
dreamtime, and later, through all the days of his life. Beyond
this bit of common knowledge, Danlo knew almost nothing of what
was to come.
26
   Soli kicked off his skis and led him inside the circle of
skulls. At the circle's centre, oriented east to west, was a
platform of packed snow. 'When we begin,' Soli said, 'you must
lie here facing the stars.' He explained that it was
traditional for the initiate boy to lie on the backs of four
kneeling men, but since the men had all gone over, the
platform would have to do. Around the platform were many piles
of wood. Soli held a glowing coal to each pile in turn, and
soon there were dozens of fires blazing. The fires would keep
Danlo from freezing to death.
 'And now we begin,' Soli said. He spread a white shagshay fur
over the platform and bade Danlo to remove his clothes. Night
had fallen, and a million stars twinkled against the blackness
of the sky. Danlo lay down on his back, with his head toward
the east as in any important ceremony. He looked up at the
stars. The lean muscles of his thighs, belly and chest were
hard beneath his ivory skin. Despite the fires' flickering
heat, he was instantly cold.
   'You may not move,' Soli said. 'No matter what you hear, you
may not turn your head. And you may not close your eyes. Above
all, on pain of death, you may not cry out. On pain of death,
Danlo.'
   Soli left him alone, then, and Danlo stared up at the deep
dome of the sky. The world and the sky, he thought – two halves
of the great circle of halla enfolding all living things. He
knew that the lights in the sky were the eyes of his ancestors,
the Old Ones, who had come out this night to watch him become a
man. There were many, many lights; Soli had taught him the art
of counting, but he could not count the number of Old Ones who
had lain here before him because it would be unseemly to count
the spirits of dead men as one did pebbles or shells by the
sea. He looked up at the stars, and he saw the eyes of his
father, and his father's fathers, and he prayed that he would
not break the great circle with cries of pain.
 After a while he began to hear sounds. There came
27
 sharp, clacking sounds, as of two rocks being struck together.
As the fires burned over him, the rhythm of the clacking
quickened; it grew louder and nearer. The sound split the
night. Danlo's right half knew that it must be Soli making this
unnerving sound, but his left half began to wonder. He could
not move his head; it seemed that the eyelight of the Old Ones
was streaming out of the blackness, dazzling him with light.
The clacking hurt his ear now and was very close. He could not
move his head to look, and he feared that the Old Ones were
coming to test him with terror. Suddenly, the clacking stopped.
Silence fell over him. He waited a long time, and all he could
hear was his deep breathing and the drumbeat of his heart. Then
there came a dreadful whirring and whooshing that he had never
experienced before; the air itself seemed to be splitting apart
with the sound. The Old Ones were coming for him, his left side
whispered. He dare not move or else they would know that he was
still just a frightened boy. How could Soli be making such a
sound, his right side wanted to know? He dare not move or Soli
would have to do a terrible thing.
   'Danlo!' a voice screamed out of the darkness. 'Danlo-mi!'
It was not Soli who called to him; it was not the voice of a
man. 'Danlo, dorona ti-lot! Danlo, we require your blood, now!'
 It was the voice of a terrible animal he had never heard
before. It screamed like a thallow and roared like a bear, all
at once. He began to tremble, or perhaps he was just shivering,
he couldn't tell which. Despite the intense cold, drops of
sweat burst from his skin all across his forehead, chest, and
belly. The animal screamed again, and Danlo waited motionless
for it to tear at the throbbing arteries of his throat. He held
his head rigid, pressing it down into the fur. He wanted to
close his eyes and scream, but he could not. Straight up at the
dazzling lights he stared, and suddenly the lights were gone.
The animal was standing over him, bending low, blocking out the
night sky. It
28
 wasn't really an animal at all; it was the Beast of the young
men's stories. It had horns and great conical teeth like a
killer whale; its cruel, hooked beak was dipping toward his
face; its claws were the claws of the snow tiger, and they
were sweeping down toward his belly and groin. He had never
seen a man wearing a mask before, but even if he had, his left
side would still be shouting that the Beast was about to rip
away at him. He held himself very still.
 'Danlo, we require your blood!' the Beast growled out again.
 To live, I die, he thought, silently repeating the Devaki
prayer of initiation.
  Ever since he could remember, ever since he had seen the
older men naked and looked between their legs with dread and
wonder, he had known this moment must come. The Beast reached
down and grasped his membrum. Its claws were cold and sharp
against the shaft. In his fear and cold, his unprotected stones
tightened up in their sac. He was very afraid; never had he
known such a belly-tightening fear, not even when Haidar fell
sick from the slow evil and began bleeding from his ears. The
fear was all over him, like dead cold air falling down from the
sky, suffocating him, clutching in his lungs. He was afraid the
Beast would cut him, yes, afraid of the pain, but even more he
dreaded convulsing like a frightened snow hare and trying to
run away. And if he did that, he would be slain. The Beast
would kill him for giving in to his fear. This thought, in
turn, fed his fear, intensified it until the sweat poured off
his ribs and soaked the furs beneath him. The wind began to
blow, chilling him to the core, and he despaired because he
felt himself falling through a black bottomless night from
which there is no escape. Fear is the consciousness of the
child – he remembered Haidar saying this once when they were
lost out at sea. He stared up at the brilliant stars, waiting
for the Beast to cut him, or tear open his throat, and in a
moment of exhilaration he realized that he was here to
surrender up his fear, or rather,
29
to lose a part of himself, to let die his childish conception
of himself as a separate being terrified of the world. All men
must be tested this way, he knew, or else they could never
become full men. Just then the Beast roared something into the
night, a huge, angry sound that rattled the skulls surrounding
him. He felt his foreskin being pulled away from the bulb of
his membrum, and there was a tearing, hot pain. He clenched his
jaws so hard he thought his teeth would break off in splinters
and be driven into his gums; his muscles strained to rip apart
his bones, and instantly, his eyes were burning so badly he
could not see. He could still hear, though, and in many ways
that was the worst of it, the crunching, ripping sound of his
foreskin being torn away from his membrum. It hurts! he
silently screamed. Oh, God, it hurts! The pain was a red flame
burning up his membrum into his belly and spine. The pain ate
him alive; the world was nothing but fire and pain. There came
a moment when his body was like a single nerve connected to a
vastly greater ganglia and webwork of living things: trees and
stars and the wolves howling in the valleys below. He could
hear the death scream of churo and yaga, and all the animals he
had ever killed exploding from his own throat; he remembered
the story of a Patwin boy who had died during his passage, and
he felt a sudden pressure below his ribs, as if a spear or claw
had pierced his liver. In one blinding moment, he saw again the
faces, of each member of his tribe as they prayed to be freed
of the slow evil. The hurt of all these peoples and things, and
everything, flowed into him like a river of molten stone. He
ached to move, to scream, to pull himself up and run away. Only
now, wholly consumed by the terrible pain that is the awareness
of life, he was no longer afraid. Beyond pain, there was only
death. Death was the left hand of life, and suddenly he beheld
its long, cold fingers and deep lines with a clarity of vision
that astonished him. Seen from one perspective, death was cruel
and dreadful like a murderer's hand held over a baby's face;
but from
30
another, death was as familiar and non-frightening as the
whorls of his father's open palm. He would die, tonight or ten
thousand nights hence – he could almost see the moment when
the light would flee his eyes and join all the other lights in
the sky. Even now, as the Beast tore at him, he was dying, but
strangely he had never been so alive. He held himself quiet
and still, listening to the wind beating through the trees and
over the mountains. He heard a voice whispering that his
membrum's red bulb must be exposed to the cold air, just as
the man within must finally shed his childlike skin of wishes
and certitude and come to know the world as it really is. That
was the way of all life, he heard the voice say. Life was
always lived with death close at hand, and it was continually
shedding death even as it made itself over to be born anew.
To live, I die, he told himself.
 And inside him, despite the pain, at the centre of his
deepest self was just sheer joy at being alive. In some sense,
he would always be alive, no matter the killing coldness of the
wind or fatal illnesses or any of a thousand other fates that
he might suffer.
 'Danlo!' the Beast howled out. Tour blood is red and flows
like a man's!'
 Danlo listened to his deep breathing as other cuts were
carved into his flesh, tiny cuts up and down the length of his
membrum. He realized that it was Soli making these cuts and
rubbing various coloured powders into them. The cuts would
fester and then heal, and soon his membrum would be like that
of any other Alaloi man: long and thick, and decorated with
dozens of green and ochre scars.
'Danlo, are you ready now?'
   He felt something soft being wrapped around his membrum; it
felt like feather moss held in place with a newl skin.
   'Danlo, you must gather your strength for the journey.' a
voice called out of the darkness. Then the Beast stood above
him, gripping a gobbet of flesh between its bloody
31
 claws. This piece of meat will sustain you. Open your mouth
and swallow it without chewing.'
 Danlo did as he was told. Like a baby bird, he opened his
mouth and waited. Suddenly, he felt the raw bit of meat pressed
into his mouth, back against his tongue. He swallowed once,
convulsively, and he tasted fresh warm blood.
   'Danlo, this is the skin of your childhood. It will
impregnate you like a seed. From the child grows the man. Are
you ready to be a man, now?'
   Again Danlo swallowed against the hot salty slickness of his
own blood.
 'Danlo, wi Ieldra sena! Ti ur-alashareth. The ancestors are
coming! It is time for you to go over now.'
 His eyes were now calm and clear, and he looked up at the
stars to see a million points of light streaming toward him.
 'Danlo, you may turn your head.'
 Danlo blinked his eyes slowly. He turned and there was Soli
standing over him. He was dressed as usual, in his winter
furs; the terrible Beast was gone. 'You have done well,' he
said.
 He helped Danlo sit up and wrapped him in a fresh shagshay
skin. There was blood everywhere, dark red soaking into the
white furs. Danlo looked through the flickering red fires up
at the circle of skulls. He must find the one animal who was
his doffel. Soli would help him if his vision faltered, but it
would be better if he came to his other-self unaided and
alone.
'Danlo, can you see?'
'Yes.'
   He was six thousand feet above men and time. He turned his
head in a half-circle, and he could see many things. Below him
were the dark forest and the starlit hills of his childhood,
and farther out where the island's ragged shore came up
against the ocean, he beheld the faint, silvery shimmer of sea
ice falling off to infinity. There were nearer
 32
 sights. Soli's face was drawn out ghastly and pale; he looked
at once fey and ill, as if he were ready to die. Pain is the
awareness of life, Danlo thought. His body still burned with
pain, but his spirit had begun the journey through pain into a
deeper world. He was beginning to see himself as he really was.
Every act of his passage had been designed to bring him to this
moment. His childish picture of himself, his old ways of
thinking – shattered, like ice crystals beneath a hammer stone.
There was a sudden clarity, an intensity of colour, shape, and
meaning. Far above him, in the sky, the stars burned with a
pale blue fire, and nearer, spread over his thighs and belly,
was his deep red blood. Again, he looked up at the circle of
skulls, at the bits of ivory gleaming in the blackness. Each
skull was his skull; life was connected to life in ways he was
just beginning to see. One skull, though, seemed to shimmer
under the watchful eyes of the Old Ones. One skull called out
to him. It was the skull of Ahira, the snowy owl. Ahira, the
wisest and wildest of the animals. No other animal was so alive
and free. And no other animal was so perilous to one's spirit.
In truth, he dreaded discovering that Ahira was his doffel, his
other-self, for only once in ten generations was one born whose
other-self is Ahira. He stared on and on waiting for this
splendid bird to stop calling him, but at last he was sure that
Ahira was his doffel. Ahira must guide him and help him go over
to the trackless, unknown world where his deepest self lived.
   Soli saw Danlo gazing at Ahira's small, round skull. That
the Devaki fathers had acquired a skull at all was something of
a miracle, for Ahira was the rarest of all birds and hunters
did not often catch sight of him. 'This bird?' Soli said. 'Are
you sure, Danlo?'
 'Yes,' Danlo said. 'Ahira, the snowy owl.'
   'Full men know this bird as the white thallow. You should
call him that, too.'
   Everyone knew, of course, that owls were thallows, just as
they knew that God was a great thallow whose body
 33
made up the universe. But among the Alaloi elders, from tribe
to tribe, there was a dispute as to whether God was a silver
thallow, or the blue thallow, or the rare white thallow whom
children referred to as the snowy owl.
'Ahira is my doffel,' Danlo said.
   'Very well,' Soli said. Then he magically produced a musty
leather bag stuffed with various objects. He rummaged around in
the bag and removed a single, white feather. He gave it to
Danlo, placing it between his folded hands. This is the wing
feather of the white thallow,' he said. The white thallow is
your doffel.'
  Danlo looked down at the feather. Its whiteness was as pure
as snow. Along its edge it was rough and fuzzy, the better to
muffle the sound of Ahira's beating wings. Ahira was a
magnificent hunter, and he could swoop down toward his prey in
almost total silence. With a little bone clip that Soli gave
him, Danlo fastened the feather to his long hair. Soli began to
chant, then, and a world whose snowfields were pure and vast
opened before him. Danlo entered into the dreamtime, into the
altjiranga mitjina of his people. The shock of pain and terror
(and his newfound ability to overcome his attachment to terror)
had hurled him into this world. He listened to Soli chant,
listened as the Old Ones began to speak to him. New knowledge
was revealed to him, secrets that only a man may know. Soli
chanted the lines of the Song of Life. The Song was a new way
of structuring reality, a system of symbol and meaning
connecting all things of the world to the great circle of
halla. There are four thousand and ninety-six lines to this
song; Soli chanted quickly, his deep voice rasping out the
music. He told of how the lesser god, Kweitkel, had created the
world from single pieces of rock and ice. He told of Kweitkel's
wedding with Devaki, and of their children, Yelena, Reina and
Manwe. Danlo learned that on the third morning of the world,
wise Ahira had befriended Manwe and taught him to love flying,
hunting, and mating, and the other things of life. Manwe and
Ahira – the Two
34
 Friends, two of the oldest of the Old Ones. Danlo listened to
the Song of Life, and he joined them in the dreamtime. The
dreamtime was now, the shall-be and always-was. The dreamtime
occurred in the Now-moment, the true time in which the world
was forever created anew.
   'Ali wos Ayeye,' Soli chanted. 'God is a great, silver
thallow whose wings touch at the far ends of the universe.'
 Danlo listened to the Song of Life's sixty-fourth line. Now,
and over the next three days, he must learn every line exactly
as Soli chanted it because someday he would repeat the Song to
a son or near-son of his own. Pain was the most potent of
mnemonics; pain had awakened him to record the rise and fall
and each liquid vowel; pain, and the intensity of pain, had
prepared his mind and spirit to remember perfectly.
 'All animals remember ...' Soli sang out, and his voice began
to tremble and crack. 'All animals remember the first morning
of the world.' He stopped suddenly, rubbing the back of his
neck. His face had fallen as grey as old seal grease. He
licked his lips and continued with difficulty. After a while,
he came to the first of the Twelve Riddles, chanting: 'How do
you capture a beautiful bird without killing its spirit?'
   Danlo waited for Soli to supply the answer in the second
line of the couplet, but Soli could not speak. He groaned and
clutched at his stomach and looked at Danlo.
   'Sir, what is wrong?' Danlo asked. He didn't want to speak
because he sensed that the uttering of words would remove him
from the dreamtime. But Soli suddenly heaved over gasping for
breath, and he had to find out what was wrong. Now that he knew
the way, he could make the journey into the dreamtime whenever
he must. 'Sir, here, let me loosen your hood's drawstring – it
is too tight.'
 It was obvious that Soli was gravely ill. Sweat beaded on his
forehead, and his nose was bleeding. His eyes were the eyes of
a whale caught unexpectedly in the freezing
35
ice of the sea. Danlo stood up, and the rush of blood into his
cut membrum was agony. He helped Soli lie down on the bloody
platform where he had so recently surrendered up his childhood
flesh. The Alaloi are not an ironic people, but he appreciated
the deep irony of their reversed positions.
'Sir, are you all right?'
  'No,' Soli gasped, 'never ... again,' He regained his wind,
and spoke slowly. 'Listen, Danlo, you must know. At a boy's
passage, one of the men must be the Beast. The Beast ... the
mask.'
 With difficulty he bent over and stuck his hand into the
leather bag. He removed a mask made of glued-together bones,
fur, teeth and feathers. He rattled the mask in front of Danlo.
  'But it is sometimes hard to become the Beast,' Soli said.
'If the boy moves or cries out ... then he must be slain. It
is hard to become the Beast by wearing the mask alone. Help is
needed. For some men, help. On the afternoon before the boy's
passage, the liver of the jewfish must be eaten. The liver
gives terrible vision, terrible power. But it is dangerous, to
eat it. Sometimes the power is too great. It consumes.'
  Danlo took Soli's hand; even though he himself was cold and
half-naked, with only a shagshay skin draped loosely across
his shoulders, Soli's hand felt colder still. 'What can I do?
Is there no cure? Should I make some blood-tea to give you
strength?'
'No, that would not help.'
'Does it hurt? Oh, sir, what can I do?'
  'I ... believe,' Soli said, 'I believe that Haidar knew of a
cure, but he has gone over, hasn't he? All the men – the
women, too.'
 Danlo blinked away the pain in his eyes, and he found that he
could see things very clearly. And on Soli's face, in his
tired, anguished eyes, there was only death. Soli would go
over soon, he knew, there could be no help for
 36
that. It was shaida for a man to die too soon, but Soli's
death would not be shaida because it was clear that he was
dying at the right time.
'Sir,' he said, 'ti-alasharia, you too, why, why?'
 'Yes,' Soli said. And then he stretched out his hand and
pointed upwards. 'The stars, you must be told about the
stars.'
 Danlo looked up through the bitterly cold air at the heavens.
He pulled the shagshay fur tightly around himself, let out a
long steamy breath, and said, 'The stars are eyes of the Old
Ones. Even a child knows that.'
 'No, the stars are ... something other.'
'Does the Song of Life tell of the stars?'
  Soli coughed deeply a few times; it seemed that he might
begin gasping again. 'Yes, the Song of Life, but that is only
one song, the song of our people. There are other songs. The
stars shine with eyelight, yes, but that is just a metaphor. A
symbol, like the symbols for numbers we used to draw in the
snow. There is an otherness about the stars that I... I must
tell you.'
'Please, sir.'
'This will be hard to explain.'
'Please.'
 Soli sighed, then said, 'Each star is like Sawel, the sun. A
burning, a fusion of hydrogen into light. Five hundred billion
fusion fires in this galaxy alone. And the galaxies ... so
many. Who could have dreamed the universe would make so many?'
   Danlo pressed his knuckles against his forehead. He felt
sick inside, dizzy and disoriented. Once, when he was eight
years old, he and Haidar had been caught out on the sea in a
morateth. The sky had closed in, white and low over the endless
whiteness of the ice. After ten days, he hadn't been able to
distinguish right from left, up from down. Now he felt lost
again, as if a morateth of the spirit were crushing him under.
'I do not understand.'
37
 'The stars are like fires burning across space. Across the
black, frozen sea. Men can cross from star to star in boats
called lightships. Such men – and women – are called pilots.
Your father was a pilot, Danlo.'
 'My father? My blood father? What was his name?' He took
Soli's hand and whispered, 'Who is my blessed father?'
 But Soli didn't seem to hear him. He began to speak of things
that Danlo couldn't comprehend. He told of the galaxy's many
wonders, of the great black hole at the core, and of that
brilliant, doomed region of the galaxy called the Vild. Human
beings, he explained, had learned to make stars explode into
supernovae; even as they spoke together, beneath the dying sky,
ten thousand spheres of light were expanding outward to the
ends of the universe. 'So many stars,' Soli said, 'so much
light.'
 Danlo, of course, couldn't comprehend that this wild
starlight would eventually reach his world and kill all of the
plants and animals on Icefall's surface. He knew only that Soli
was dying, and seeing visions of impossible things.
'Sir, who is my father?' he repeated.
   But now Soli had lapsed into a private, final vision, and
his words made no sense at all. The rings,' Soli forced out.
The rings. Of light. The rings of eternity, and I ... I, oh, it
hurts, it hurts, it hurts!'
   Quite possibly he was trying to tell Danlo that he was his
grandfather, but he failed, and soon his lips fell blue and
silent, and he would never utter any words again.
'Soli, Soli!'
   Again, Soli began gasping for air, and very soon he stopped
breathing altogether. He lay still with his eyes fixed on the
stars. Danlo was surprised at how quickly he had died.
'Soli, mi alasharia la shantih Devaki.'
 How many times, Danlo wondered, had he said that prayer? How
many times must he say it again?
38
   He closed Soli's eyes and kissed them. 'Shantih, Soli, may
your spirit find the way to the other side.'
   Then the enormity of all that had occurred during the past
days overwhelmed him. He jumped up and threw off his fur,
standing naked to the world. 'No!' he cried out. 'No!' But
there was no one to listen to him. The fires had burnt low, dim
orange glimmerings lost into the blackness of night. It was
very cold. He watched the fires die, and he began to shiver
violently. 'No,' he whispered, and the wind stole the breath
from his lips and swept it away. His body hurt so urgently that
he welcomed numbness, but next to the pain of his spirit, it
was almost nothing. How would he live now, he wondered, what
would he do? He had been cut, and part of him had died, and so
he was no longer of the onabara, the once-born children. But
until he completed his passage, he would remain unfinished,
like a spearpoint without an edge; he would never be of the
diabara, the twice-born men. And because he knew that only a
twice-born man who had learned the whole Song of Life could be
wholly alive, he almost despaired.
   Later that night, above the cave, he buried Soli with the
others. After he had hefted the last frozen boulder onto his
grave, he prayed. 'Soli, pela ur-padda, mi alasharia, shantih.'
He pressed his eyes hard before shaking his head and crying
out, 'Oh, Ahira, what shall I do?'
 He fell into the dreamtime, then, and the wind through the
trees answered him. There was a rush of air carrying the
deep-throated hooing of the snowy owl. It was Ahira, his
other-self. Perched high on a yu tree's silvery branch, across
the snow-covered graveyard, Ahira was looking through the
darkness for him.
'Ahira, Ahira.'
   The owl's snowy round head turned toward him. His eyes were
orange and black, wild and infinitely wise.
   'Danlo, Danlo.' The owl turned his head again, and there was
a shimmer of starlight off his eyes. And Danlo suddenly beheld
a part of the circle of halla: the World-soul
39
 did not intend for him to join the Patwin tribe, nor any other
tribe of the islands to the west. Who was he to bear the taint
of shaida to his uncles and cousins? No, he would not burden
his people with such unspeakable sorrows. No matter how badly
he needed to hear the whole Song of Life, his future and his
fate did not lie in that direction.
 I must journey east, he thought. I must go to the Unreal City
alone.
 Somehow he must make the impossible journey to the city
called Neverness. And someday, to the stars. If the stars
really were fusion fires burning in the night, they were part
of a vast, larger world that must know halla, too.
   To Ahira, he solemnly bowed his head. 'Mi alasharetha,'
Danlo said, praying for that part of himself that had died.
'Shantih.'
 Then he turned his back to the wind and wept for a long time.
40
CHAPTER TWO

Danlo the Wild

The organism is a theory of its environment.
 – Walter Wiener, Holocaust Century Ecologist

 It took Danlo nine days to prepare for his journey. Five days
he spent in his snowhut, recovering from his cutting. He
begrudged every day of it because he knew that the sledding
across the eastern ice would be dangerous and long. According
to Soli's stories, the Unreal City lay at least forty days away
– perhaps more. Since it was already 82nd day in deep winter,
he couldn't hope to reach the City until the middle of
midwinter spring. And midwinter spring was the worst season for
travel. Who could say when a fierce sarsara, the Serpent's
Breath, would blow in from the north, heralding many days of
blizzard? If the storms delayed his crossing too long, he might
be stranded far out on the Starnbergersee when false winter's
hot sun came out and melted the sea ice. And then he and his
dogs would die. No, he thought, he must find the City long
before then.
   And so, when he deemed himself healed, he went out to hunt
shagshay. Skiing through the valleys below Kweitkel was now
very painful, since every push and glide caused his membrum to
chafe against the inside of his trousers. Pissing could be an
agony. The air stung the exposed red tip of his membrum
whenever he paused to empty himself. Even so he hunted
diligently and often because he needed a lot of meat. (Ice
fishing through a hole in the stream's ice would have been an
easier source
41
 of food, but he found that the fatfish were not running that
year.) He cut the meat and scant blubber into rations; he
sealed the rich blood into waterproof skins; he entered the
cave and raided the winter barrels of baldo nuts. Into his sled
went carefully measured packets of food. Into his sled, he
carefully stowed his oilstone, sleeping furs, bag of flints,
and bear spear. And, of course, his long, barbed whalebone
harpoon. The dogs could pull only so much weight. Somewhere to
the east they would finish the last of the food, and he would
use the harpoon to hunt seals. On the morning of his departure
he faced the first of many hard decisions: what to do with the
dogs? He would need only seven dogs to pull the sled: Bodi,
Luyu, Kono, Siegfried, Noe, Atal, and his best friend, Jiro.
The others, the dogs of Wicent and Jaywe, and the other
families of the tribe, he would have to let loose. Or kill.
After he had loaded his sled, he paused to look at the dogs
staked out near their snow dens at the front of the cave. There
were fifty-nine of them, and they were watching him with their
pale blue eyes, wagging their tales and whining. In truth, he
knew it was his duty to kill them, for how would they live
without men to get their food and comfort them when they were
sick or lonely? The dogs would flee barking into the forest,
and they would pack and try to hunt. The wolves, however, were
better hunters than the dogs; the silent wolves would track and
circle them, and they would kill the dogs one by one. Or they
would die of hunger, with folds of flesh hanging loosely over
their bones. The dogs would surely die, but who was he to kill
them? He thought it would be better for them to know a single
additional day of life, even if that day were filled with pain
and terror. He looked over the treetops into the sky. It was
sharda, a deep, deep blue. The deep sky, the green and white
hills, the smells of life – even a dog could love the world and
experience something like joy. Joy is the right of terror, he
told himself, and he knew he wouldn't steal the dogs away from
life. He nodded his head
42
 decisively. He smiled and trudged up through the powdery snow
to set them free.
 The last thing he did before leaving was to press his
forehead against the bare rocks near the mouth of the cave. He
did this because Manwe, on the twelfth morning of the world,
had performed just such a gesture before setting out on his
journey to visit all the islands of God's new creation.
'Kweitkel, narulanda,' he said, 'farewell.'
 With a whistle to his sled dogs he began his journey as all
Alaloi men do: slowly, cautiously schussing through the forest
down to the frozen sea. There, beyond the beach of his blessed
island, the icefields began. The gleaming white ice spread out
in a great circle, and far off, at the horizon, touched the
sky. It was the oldest of teachings to live solely for the
journey, taking each moment of ice and wind as it came. But
because he was still a boy with wild dreams, he couldn't help
thinking of the journey's end, of the Unreal City. That he
would reach the City, he felt certain, although in truth, it
was a journey only a very strong man should contemplate making
alone. There was a zest and aliveness about him at odds with
all that had happened. He couldn't help smiling into the
sunrise, into the fusion fire glistering red above the world's
rim. Because he was hot with excitement, he had his snow
goggles off and his hood thrown back. The wind lashed his hair;
it almost tore away Ahira's shining white feather. His face was
brown against the white ruff of his hood. It was a young face,
beardless and full of warmth and hope, but for all that, a
strong, wild face cut with sun and wind and sorrow. With his
long nose puffing steam and his high cheekbones catching the
glint of the snowfields, there was a harshness there, softened
only by his eyes. He had unique eyes, large and blue-black like
the early evening sky. Yujena oyu, as the Alaloi say – eyes
that see too deeply and too much.
 Danlo handled the sled and guided the dogs across the ragged
drift ice with skill and grace. Many times Haidar and he had
made such outings, though they had never
43
travelled very far from land. Six hundred miles of frozen sea
lay before him, but he knew little of distances measured in
this manner. For him and his panting dogs, each segment of ice
crossed was a day, and each day rose and fell with the rhythm
of eating, sledding, and sawing the blocks of snow that he
shaped into a hut every night. And finally, after he had fed
the dogs and eaten again himself, after he had slipped down
into the silky warmth of his furs, sleep. He loved to sleep,
even though it was hard to sleep alone. Often he would have bad
dreams and cry out in his sleep; often he would awake sweating
to see the oilstone burnt low and its light nearly
extinguished. He always welcomed morning. It was always very
cold, but always the air was clear, and the eastern sky was
full of light, and the blessed mountain, Kweitkel, was every
day vanishingly smaller behind him.
 For twenty-nine days he travelled due east without mishap or
incident. A civilized man making such a journey would have
been bored by the monotony of ice and the seamless blue sky.
But Danlo was not yet civilized; in his spirit he was wholly
Alaloi, wholly taken with the elements of the world. And to
his eyes there were many, many things to look at, not just sky
and ice. There was soreesh, the fresh powder snow that fell
every four or five days. When the wind blew out of the west
and packed the snow so that it was fast and good for sledding,
it became safel. The Alaloi have a hundred words for snow. To
have a word for an object, idea or feeling is to distinguish
that thing from all others, to enable one to perceive its
unique qualities. For the Alaloi, as for all peoples, words
literally create things, or rather, they create the way our
minds divide and categorize the indivisible wholeness of the
world into things. Too often, words determine what we do and
do not see.
   Ice and sky, sky and ice – when he awoke on the thirtieth
morning of his journey, the ice surrounding his hut was
ilka-so, frozen in a lovely, wind-driven ripple pattern.
 44
 Farther out were bands of ilka-rada, great blocks of
aquamarine ice heaved up by the contractions of the freezing
sea. The sky itself was not purely blue; in places, at various
times of the day, high above, there was a yellowish glare from
light reflected off the snowfields. And the snowfields were not
always white; sometimes, colonial algae and other organisms
spread out through the top layers of snow and coloured it with
violets and blues. These growths were called iceblooms,
urashin, and Danlo could see the faint purple of the iceblooms
off in the distance where the world curved into the sky.
Kitikeesha birds were a white cloud above the iceblooms. The
kitikeesha were snow eaters; at this time of the year, they
made their living by scooping snow into their yellow bills and
eating the snowworms, which in turn lived on the algae. (The
furry, tunnelling sleekits, which could be found near any
island or piece of land, also ate snow; sleekits would eat
anything: algae, snowworms, or even snowworm droppings.) Danlo
liked to stand with his hand shielding his eyes, looking at the
iceblooms. Looking for Ahira. Sometimes, the snowy owls
followed the kitikeesha flocks and preyed upon them. Ahira was
always glad to sink his talons into a nice, plump kitikeechick,
but on the thirtieth morning, Danlo looked for his doffel in
vain. Ahira, he knew, was very wise and would not fly when a
storm was near. 'Ahira, Ahira,' he called, but he received no
reply. No direct reply, that is, no screeching or hooing or
beating of wings. In silence, Ahira answered him. The Alaloi
have five words for silence, and nona, the silence that
portends danger, is as meaningful as a bellyful of words. In
nona, Danlo turned his face to the wind and listened to things
no civilized man could hear. That day he did not travel.
Instead, he cut snow blocks for a hut larger and sturdier than
his usual nightly shelter. Into the hut he moved the food
packets from the sled. He brought the dogs into the hut as
well, bedding them down in the long tunnel that led to his
living chamber. He made sure that there was snow to melt into
drinking water and
45
 enough blubber to burn in the oilstone. And then he waited.
   The storm began as a breath of wind out of the north. High
wispy clouds called otetha whitened the sky. The wind blew for
a long time, intensifying gradually into a hiss. It was the
Serpent's Breath, the sarsara that every traveller fears. Danlo
listened to the wind inside his hut, listened as it sought out
the chinks between the snowblocks and whistled through to
strike at his soft, warm flesh. It was a cold wind, dead cold,
so-named because it had killed many of his people. It drove
glittering particles of spindrift into his hut. Soon, a layer
of cold white powder covered his sleeping furs. The curled-up
dogs were tougher than he, and didn't really mind sleeping
beneath a shroud of snow. But Danlo was shivering cold, and so
he worked very hard to find and patch each chink with handfuls
of malku, slush ice melted from the heat of his hand. After the
malku had frozen in place – and this took only a moment – he
could breathe more easily and settle back to 'wait with a
vengeance', as the Alaloi say.
   He waited ten days. It began snowing that evening. It was
too cold to snow very much, but what little snow that the sky
shed, the wind found and blew into drifts. 'Snow is the frozen
tears of Nashira, the sky,' he told Jiro. He had called the dog
closer to the oilstone and was playing tug-of-war with him. He
pulled at one end of a braided leather rope while Jiro had the
other end clamped between his teeth, growling and shaking his
head back and forth. It was childish to pamper the dog with
such play, but he excused himself from the usual travelling
discipline with the thought that it was bad for a man – or a
half-man – to be alone. Today, the sky is sad because the
Devaki have all gone over. And tomorrow too, I think, sad, and
the next day as well. Jiro, Jiro, why is everything in the
world so sad?'
 The dog dropped the rope, whined, and poked his wet nose into
his face. He licked the salt off of his cheeks. Danlo
46
 laughed and scratched behind Jiro's ears. Dogs, he thought,
were almost never sad. They were happy just to gobble down a
little meat every day, happy sniffing the air or competing
with each other to see who could get his leg up the highest
and spray the most piss against the snowhut's yellow wall.
Dogs had no conception of shaida, and they were never troubled
by it as people were.
 While the storm built ever stronger and howled like a
wolverine caught in a trap, he spent most of his time cocooned
in his sleeping furs, thinking. In his mind, he searched for
the source of shaida. Most of the Alaloi tribes believed that
only a human being could be touched with shaida, or rather,
that only a human being could bring shaida into the world. And
shaida, itself, could infect only the outer part of a man, his
face, which is the Alaloi term for persona, character, cultural
imprinting, emotions, and the thinking mind. The deep self, his
purusha, was as pure and clear as glacier ice; it could be
neither altered nor sullied nor harmed in any way. He thought
about his tribe's most sacred teachings, and he asked himself a
penetrating, heretical question: what if Haidar and the other
dead fathers of his tribe had been wrong? Perhaps people were
really like fragments of clear ice with cracks running through
the centre. Perhaps shaida touched the deepest parts of each
man and child. And since people (and his word for 'people' was
simply 'Devaki') were of the world, he would have to journey
into the very heart of the world to find shaida's true source.
Shaida is the cry of the world when it has lost its soul he
thought. Only, how could the world ever lose its soul? What if
the World-soul were not lost, but rather, inherently flawed
with shaida?
   For most of a day and a night, like a thallow circling in
search of prey, he skirted the track of this terrifying
thought. If, as he had been taught, the world were continually
being created, every moment being pushed screaming from the
bloody womb of Time, that meant that shaida
47
was being created, too. Every moment, then, impregnated with
flaws that might eventually grow and fracture outward and
shatter the world and all its creatures. If this were so, then
there could be no evolution toward harmony, no balance of life
and death, no help for pain. All that is not halla is shaida,
he remembered. But if everything were shaida, then true halla
could never be.
   Even though Danlo was young, he sensed that such logical
thinking was itself flawed in some basic way, for it led to
despair of life, and try as he could, he couldn't help feeling
the life inside where it surged, all hot and eager and good.
Perhaps his assumptions were wrong; perhaps he did not
understand the true nature of shaida and halla; perhaps logic
was not as keen a tool as Soli had taught him it could be. If
only Soli hadn't died so suddenly, he might have heard the
whole Song of Life and learned a way of affirmation beyond
logic.
   When he grew frustrated with pure thought, he turned to
other pursuits. He spent most of three days carving a piece of
ivory into a likeness of the snowy owl. He told animal stories
to the dogs; he explained how Manwe, on the long tenth morning
of the world, had changed into the shape of the wolf, into
snowworm and sleekit, and then into the great white bear and
all the other animals. Manwe had done this magical thing in
order to truly understand the animals he must one day hunt.
And, too, because a man must know in his bones that his true
spirit was as mutable as ivory or clay. Danlo loved enacting
these stories. He was a wonderful mimic. He would get down on
all fours and howl like a wolf, or suddenly rear up like a
cornered bear, bellowing and swatting at the air. Sometimes he
frightened the dogs this way, for it was no fun merely to act
like a snow tiger or thallow or bear; he had to become these
animals in every nuance and attitude of his body – and in his
love of killing and blood. Once or twice he even frightened
himself, and if he had had a mirror or pool of water to gaze
into, it wouldn't have
48
 surprised him to see fangs glistening inside his jaws, or fur
sprouting all white and thick across his wild face.
 But perhaps his favourite diversion was the study of
mathematics. Often he would amuse himself drawing circles in
the hard-packed snow of his bed. The art of geometry he adored
because it was full of startling harmonies and beauty that
arose out of the simplest axioms. The wind shifted to the
northwest and keened for days, and he lay half out of his
sleeping furs, etching figures with his long fingernail. Jiro
liked to watch him scurf off a patch of snow; he liked to stick
his black nose into a mound of scraped-off powder, to sniff and
bark and blow the cold stuff all over Danlo's chest. (Like all
the Alaloi, Danlo slept nude. Unlike his near-brothers,
however, he had always found the snowhuts too cold for crawling
around without clothes, so he kept to his sleeping furs
whenever he could.) It was the dog's way of letting him know he
was hungry. Danlo hated feeding the dogs, not only because it
meant a separation from his warm bed, but because they were
steadily running out of food. It pained him every time he
opened another crackling, frozen packet of meat. He wished he
had had better luck spearing fatfish for the dogs because
fatfish were more sustaining than the lean shagshay meat and
seemed to last longer. Though, in truth, he loathed taking dogs
inside the hut whenever their only food was fish. It was bad
enough that the hut already stank of rotten meat, piss, and
dung. Having to scoop out the seven piles of dung which every
day collected in the tunnel was bad indeed, but at least the
dung was meat-dog-dung and not the awful smelling fish-dog-dung
that the dogs themselves were reluctant to sniff. Nothing in
the world was so foul as fish-dog-dung.
 On the eighth morning of the storm, he fed them their final
rations of food. His food – baldo nuts, a little silk belly
meat, and blood-tea – would last a little longer, perhaps
another tenday, that is, if he didn't share it with the dogs.
And he would have to share, or else the dogs would have
49
 no strength for sled pulling. Of course, he could sacrifice
one of the dogs and butcher him up to feed the others, but the
truth is, he had always liked his dogs more than an Alaloi
should, and he dreaded the need for killing them. He whistled
to coax the sun out of his bed and prayed, 'O Sawel,
aparia-la!' But there was only snow and wind, the ragged,
hissing wind that devours even the sun.
 One night, though, there was silence. Danlo awakened to
wonoon, the white silence of a new world waiting to take its
first breath. He sat up and listened a while before deciding
to get dressed. He slipped the light, soft underfur over his
head, and then he put on his shagshay furs, his trousers and
parka. He took care that his still sore membrum was properly
tucked to the left, into the pouch his found-mother had sewn
into his trousers. Next, he pulled his waterproof sealskin
boots snug over his calves. Then he crawled through the tunnel
where the dogs slept, dislodged the entrance snowblock, and
stepped outside.
 The sky was brilliant with stars; he had never seen so many
stars. The lights in the sky were stars, and far off, falling
out into space where it curved black and deep, points of light
swirled together as densely as an ice-mist. The sight made him
instantly sad, instantly cold and numinous with longing. Who
could stare out into the vast light-distances and not feel a
little holy? Who could stand alone in the starlight and not
suffer the terrible nearness of infinity? Each man and woman is
a star, he remembered. Many stars, such as Behira, Alaula, and
Kalinda, he knew by name. To the north, he beheld the Bear,
Fish, and Thallow constellations; to the west, the Lone White
Wolf bared his glittering teeth. Two strange stars shined in
the east, balls of white light as big as moons, whatever moons
really were. (Soli had told him that the moons of the night
were other worlds, icy mirrors reflecting the light of the sun,
but how could this be?) Nonablinka and Shurablinka were strange
indeed, supernovae that had exploded years ago in one of the
galaxy's spiral arms. Danlo, of course, under-
50
 stood almost nothing of exploding stars. He called them simply
blinkans, stars which, from time to time, would appear from
nowhere, burn brightly for a while and then disappear into the
blackness from which they came. In the east, too, was the
strangest light in the sky. It had no name that he knew, but he
thought of it as the Golden Flower, with its rings of
amber-gold shimmering just beyond the dark edge of the world.
Five years ago, it had been born as a speck of golden light;
for five years it had slowly grown outward, opening up into
space like a fireflower. The various golden hues flowed and
changed colour as he watched; they rippled and seemed alive
with pattern and purpose. And then he had an astonishing
thought, astonishing because it happened to be true: Perhaps
the Golden Flower really was alive. If men could journey past
the stars, he thought, then surely other living things could as
well, things that might be like flowers or birds or
butterflies. Someday, if he became a pilot, he must ask these
strange creatures their names and tell them his own; he must
ask them if they ached when the stellar winds blew cold or
longed to join the great oceans of life which must flow outward
toward the end of the universe, that is, if the universe came
to an end instead of going on and on forever.
 O blessed God! he prayed, how much farther was the Unreal
City? What if he missed it by sledding too far north or south?
Haidar had taught him to steer by the stars, and according to
the stories, the Unreal City lay due east of Kweitkel. He
looked off into the east, out across the starlit seascape. The
drift ice and snowfields gleamed faintly; dunes of new snow
rose up in sweeping, swirling shapes, half in silver-white and
half lost in shadow. It was very beautiful, the cold, sad,
fleeting beauty of shona-lara, the beauty that hints of death.
Now the midwinter storms would blow one after the other, and
snow would smother the iceblooms, which would die. And the
snowworms would starve, and the sleekits – those who weren't
quick
 51
 enough to flee to the islands – would starve, too. The birds
would fly to miurasalia and the other islands of the north,
because very soon, after the storms were done, the harsh sun
would come out, and there would be no more snow or ice or
starvation because there would be nothing left to starve.
  Later that day, at first light, he went out to hunt seals.
Each hooded seal – or ringed or grey seal – keeps many holes
open in the sea ice; the ice of the sea, east and west, is
everywhere pocked by their holes. But the holes are sometimes
scarce and irregularly spaced. Snow always covers them, making
them hard to find. Danlo leashed his best seal dog, Siegfried,
and together they zigzagged this way and that across the pearl
grey-snow. Siegfried, with his keen nose, should have been able
to sniff out at least a few seal holes. But their luck was bad,
and they found no holes that day. Nor the next day, nor the day
after that. On the forty-third morning of his journey, Danlo
decided that he must sled on, even though now he only had baldo
nuts to eat and the dogs had nothing. It was a hard decision.
He could stay and hope to find seals by searching the ice to
the north. But if he wasted too many days and found no seals,
the storms would come and kill him. 'Ahira, Ahira,' he said
aloud, to the sky, 'where will I find food?' This time,
however, his doffel didn't answer him, not even in silence. He
knew that although the snowy owl has the most far-seeing eyes
of any animal, his sense of smell is poor. Ahira could not tell
him what to do.
 And so Danlo and his dogs began to starve in earnest. Even
though he had eaten well all his life, he had heard many
stories about starvation. And instinctively, he knew what it
is like to starve – all men and animals do. When there is no
food, the body itself becomes food. Flesh falls inward. The
body's various tissues are burnt like seal blubber inside a
sac of loose, collapsing skin, burnt solely to keep the brain
fresh and the heart beating a while longer. All animals will
flee starvation, and so Danlo sledded due
52
 east into another storm, which didn't last as long as the
first storm, but lasted long enough. Bodi was the first dog to
die, probably from a stroke fighting with Siegfried over some
bloody, frozen wrappings he had given them to gnaw on. Danlo
cut up Bodi and roasted him over the oilstone. He was surprised
at how good he tasted. There was little life in the lean,
desiccated meat of one scrawny dog, but it was enough to keep
him and the remaining dogs sledding east into other storms. The
snows of midwinter spring turned heavier and wet; the thick,
clumpy maleesh was hard to pull through because it froze and
stuck to the runners of the sled. It froze to the fur inside
the dogs' paws. Danlo tied leather socks around their cracked,
bleeding paws, but the famished dogs ate them off and ate the
scabs as well. Luyu, Noe, and Atal each died from bleeding
paws, or rather, from the black rot that sets in when the flesh
is too weak to fight infection. In truth, Danlo helped them
over with a spear through the throat because they were in pain,
whining and yelping terribly. Their meat did not taste as good
as Bodi's, and there was less of it. Kono and Siegfried would
not eat this tainted meat, probably because they no longer
cared if they lived or died. Or perhaps they were ill and could
no longer tolerate food. For days the two dogs lay in the
snowhut staring listlessly until they were too weak even to
stare. That was the way of starvation: after too much of the
flesh had fallen off and gone over, the remaining half desired
nothing so much as reunion and wholeness on the other side of
day.
   'Mi Kono eth mi Siegfried,' Danlo said, praying for the
dogs' spirits, 'alasharia-la huzigi anima.' Again, he brought
out his seal knife and butchered the dead animals. This time he
and Jiro ate many chunks of roasted dog, for they were very
hungry, and it is the Alaloi way to gorge whenever fresh meat
is at hand. After they had finished their feast, Danlo cut the
remaining meat into rations and put it away.
'Jiro, Jiro,' he said, calling his last dog over to him. With
53
 only the two of them left, the little snowhut seemed too big.
 Jiro waddled closer, his belly bulging and distended. He
rested his head on Danlo's leg and let him scratch his ears.
 'My friend, we have had forty-six days of sledding and
twenty-two days of storm. When will we find the Unreal City?'
   The dog began licking his bleeding paws, licking and
whining. Danlo coughed and bent over the oilstone to ladle out
some hot dog grease melting in the pot. It was hard for him to
move his arms because he was very tired, very weak. He rubbed
his chest with the grease. He hated to touch his chest, hated
the feel of his rib bones and wasted muscles, but everyone
knew that hot grease was good for coughing fits. It was also
good for frostbite, so he rubbed more grease over his face,
over those burning patches where the dead, white skin had
sloughed off. That was another thing about starvation: the
body burnt too little food to keep the tissues from freezing.
   'Perhaps the Unreal City was just a dream of Soli's; perhaps
the Unreal City does not exist.'
 The next day, he helped Jiro pull the sled. Even though it
was lighter, with only twelve food packets stowed among the ice
saw, sleeping furs, hide scraper, oilstone, it was still too
heavy. He puffed and sweated and strained for a few miles
before deciding to throw away the hide scraper, the spare
carving wood and ivory, and the fishing lines. He would have no
time for fishing now, and if he reached the Unreal City, he
could make new fishing gear and the other tools he might need
to live. He pulled the lightened sled with all his strength,
and Jiro pulled too, pulled with his pink tongue lolling out
and his chest hard against the leather harness, but they were
not strong enough to move it very far or very fast. One boy-man
and a starved dog cannot match the work of an entire sled team.
The gruelling labour all day in the cold was killing them. Jiro
whined in frustration, and Danlo felt like crying. But he
couldn't
54
 cry because the tears would freeze, and men (and women)
weren't allowed to cry over hardships. No, crying was
unseemly, he thought, unless of course one of the tribe had
died and gone over – then a man could cry an ocean of tears;
then a true man was required to cry.
   Soon, he thought, he too would be dead. The coming of his
death was as certain as the next storm; it bothered him only
that there would be no one left to cry for him, to bury him or
to pray for his spirit. (Though Jiro might whine and howl for a
while before eating the meat from his emaciated bones. Although
it is not the Alaloi way to allow animals to desecrate their
corpses, after all that had happened, Danlo did not begrudge
the dog a little taste of human meat.)
 'Unreal City,' he repeated over and over as he stared off
into the blinding eastern snowfields, 'unreal, unreal.'
 But it was not the World-soul's intention that Jiro eat him.
Day by day the sledding became harder, and then impossible. It
was very late in the season. The sun, during the day, burned
too hotly. The snow turned to fareesh, round, granular
particles of snow melted and refrozen each day and night. In
many places, the sea ice was topped with thick layers of malku.
On the eighty-fifth day of their journey, after a brutal
morning of pulling through this frozen slush, Jiro fell dead in
his harness. Danlo untied him, lifted him into his lap and gave
him a last drink of water by letting some snowmelt spill out of
his lips into the dog's open mouth. He cried, then, allowing
himself a time of tears because a dog's spirit is really very
much the same as a man's.
'Jiro, Jiro,' he said, 'farewell.'
 He placed his hand over his eyes and blinked to clear them.
Just then he chanced to look up from the snow into the east. It
was hard to see, with the sun so brilliant and blinding off the
ice. But through the tears and the hazy glare, in the distance,
stood a mountain. Its outline was faint and wavered like water.
Perhaps it wasn't a mountain
55
 after all, he worried; perhaps it was only the
mithral-landia, a traveller's snow-delirious hallucination. He
blinked and stared, and he blinked again. No, it was certainly
a mountain, a jagged white tooth of ice biting the sky. He
knew it must be the island of the shadow-men, for there was no
other land in that direction. At last, perhaps some five or
six days' journey eastward, the Unreal City.
 He looked down at the dog lying still in the snow. He stroked
his sharp grey ears all the while breathing slowly: everything
seemed to smell of sunlight and wet, rank dog fur.
   'Why did you have to die so soon?' he asked. He knew he
would have to eat the dog now, but he didn't want to eat him.
Jiro was his friend; how could he eat a friend?
   He pressed his fist against his belly, which was now nothing
more than a shrunken bag of acid and pain. Just then the wind
came up, and he thought he heard Ahira calling to him from the
island, calling him to the terrible necessity of life. 'Danlo,
Danlo,' he heard his other-self say, 'if you go over now, you
will never know halla.'
   And so, after due care and contemplation, he took out his
knife and did what he had to. The dog was only bones and fur
and a little bit of stringy muscle. He ate the dog, ate most of
him that day, and the rest over the next several days. The
liver he did not eat, nor the nose nor paws. Dog liver was
poisonous, and as for the other parts, everyone knew that
eating them was bad luck. Everything else, even the tongue, he
devoured. (Many Alaloi, mostly those of the far western tribes,
will not eat the tongue under any circumstances because they
are afraid it will make them bark like a dog.) He made a pack
out of his sleeping furs. From the sled he chose only those
items vital for survival: the oilstone, snowsaw, his bag of
carving flints, and bear spear. He strapped on his skis. Into
the east he journeyed, abandoning his sled without another
thought. In the Unreal City, on the island of the shadow-men,
he could
56
always gather whalebone and cut wood to make another sled.
   In his later years he was to remember only poorly those next
few days of skiing across the ice. Memory is the most
mysterious of phenomena. For a boy to remember vividly, he must
experience the world with the deepest engagement of his senses,
and this Danlo could not do because he was weak of limb and
blurry of eye and clouded and numb in his mind.
   Every morning he slid one ski ahead of the other, crunching
through the frozen slush in endless alternation; every night he
built a hut and slept alone. He followed the shining mountain
eastward until it grew from a tooth to a huge, snow-encrusted
horn rising out of the sea. Waaskel, he remembered, was what
the shadow-men called it. As he drew closer he could see that
Waaskel was joined by two brother peaks whose names Soli had
neglected to tell him – this half ring of mountains dwarfed the
island. He couldn't make out much of the island itself because
a bank of grey clouds lay over the forests and the mountains'
lower slopes. It was at the end of his journey's ninetieth day
that the clouds began clearing and he first caught sight of the
City. He had just finished building his nightly hut (it was a
pity, he thought, to have to build a hut with the island so
close, no more than half a day's skiing away) when he saw a
light in the distance. The twilight was freezing fast, and the
stars were coming out, and something was wrong with the stars.
At times, during flickering instants when the clouds billowed
and shifted, there were stars below the dark outline of the
mountains. He looked more closely. To his left stood the
ghost-grey horn of Waaskel; to his right, across a silver,
frozen tongue of water that appeared to be a sound or bay,
there was something strange. Then the wind came up and blew the
last clouds away. There, on a narrow peninsula of land jutting
out into the ocean, the Unreal City was revealed. In truth, it
was not unreal at all. There were a million lights and a
57
 thousand towering needles of stone, and the lights were
burning inside the stone needles, burning like yellow lights
inside an oilstone, yet radiating outward so that each needle
caught the light of every other and the whole City shimmered
with light.
 'O blessed God!' Danlo muttered to the wind. It was the most
beautiful thing he had ever seen, this City of Light so
startling and splendid against the night time sky. It was
beautiful, yes, but it was not a halla beauty, for something
in the grand array of stone buildings hinted of pride and
discord and a terrible longing completely at odds with halla.
   'Losas shona, 'he said. Shona – the beauty of light; the
beauty that is pleasing to the eye.
 He studied the City while the wind began to hiss. He
marvelled at the variety and size of the buildings, which he
thought of as immense stone huts flung up into the naked air
with a grace and art beyond all comprehension. There were
marble towers as bright as milk-ice, black glass needles, and
spires of intricately carved granite and basalt and other dark
stones; and at the edge of the sound where the sea swept up
against frozen city, he beheld the glittering curves of a great
crystal dome a hundred times larger than the largest snowhut.
Who could have built such impossibilities, he wondered? Who
could cut the millions of stone blocks and fit them together?
   For a long time he stood there awestruck, trying to count
the lights of the City. He rubbed his eyes and peeled some dead
skin off his nose as the wind began to build. The wind cut his
face. It hissed in his ears and chilled his throat. Out of the
north it howled, blowing dark sheets of spindrift and despair.
With his ice-encrusted mitten, he covered his eyes, bowed his
head, and listened with dread to the rising wind. It was a
sarsara, perhaps the beginning of a tenday storm. Danlo had
thought it was too late in the season for a sarsara, but there
could be no mistaking the sharpness of this icy wind which he
had learned to fear and hate. He should go into his hut, he
reminded himself. He should
58
light the oilstone; he should eat and pray and wait for the
wind to die. But there was no food left to eat, not even a
mouldy baldo nut. If he waited, his hut would become an icy
tomb.
 And so, with the island of the shadow-men so near, he struck
out into the storm. It was a desperate thing to do, and the
need to keep moving through the darkness made him sick deep
inside his throat. The wind was now a wall of stinging ice and
blackness which closed off any light. He couldn't see his feet
beneath him, couldn't get a feel for the uneven snow as he
glided and stumbled onward. The wind cut his eyes and would
have blinded him, so he squinted and ducked his head. Even
though he was delirious with hunger, he had a plan. He tried to
ski straight ahead by summoning up his sense of dead reckoning
(so-called because if he didn't reckon correctly, he would be
dead). He steered straight toward the bay that separated the
mountain, Waaskel, from the City. If it were the World-soul's
intention, he thought, he would find the island. He could build
a hut beneath some yu trees, kill a few sleekits, rob their
mounds of baldo nuts, and he might survive.
   He skied all night. At first, he had worried about the great
white bears that haunt the sea ice after the world has grown
dark. But even old, toothless bears were never so desperate or
hungry that they would stalk a human being through such a
storm. After many long moments of pushing and gliding, gliding
and pushing, he had neither thought for bears, nor for worry,
nor for anything except his need to keep moving through the
endless snow. The storm gradually built to a full blizzard, and
it grew hard to breathe. Particles of ice broke against the
soft tissues inside his nose and mouth. With every gasp stolen
from the ferocious wind, he became weaker, more delirious. He
heard Ahira screaming in the wind. Somewhere ahead, in the sea
of blackness, Ahira was calling him to the land of his new
home. 'Ahira, Ahira!' He tried to answer back, but he couldn't
feel his lips to move them. The blizzard was wild
 59
 with snow and death; this wildness chilled him inside, and he
felt a terrible urge to keep moving, even though all movement
was agony. His arms and legs seemed infinitely heavy, his
bones as dense and cold as stone. Only bone remembers pain –
that was a saying of Haidar's. Very well, he thought, if he
lived, his bones would have much to remember. His eye sockets
hurt, and whenever he sucked in a frigid breath, his nose,
teeth, and jaw ached. He tried each moment to find the best of
his quickness and strength, to flee the terrible cold, but
each moment the cold intensified and hardened all around him,
and through him, until even his blood grew heavy and thick
with cold. Numbness crept from his toes into his feet; he
could barely feel his feet. Twice, his toes turned hard with
frostbite, and he had to stop, to sit down in the snow, bare
each foot in turn, and thrust his icy toes into his mouth. He
had no way to thaw them properly. After he had resumed pushing
through the snowdrifts, his toes froze again. Soon, he knew,
his feet would freeze all the way up to his ankles, freeze as
hard as ice. There was nothing he could do. Most likely, a few
days after they were thawed, his feet would run to rot. And
then he – or one of the City's shadow-men – would have to cut
them off.
 In this manner, always facing the wind that was killing him,
or rather, always keeping the wind to his left, to the frozen
left side of his face, by the wildest of chances, he came to
land at the northern edge of Neverness. A beach frozen with
snow – it was called the Darghinni Sands – rose up before him,
though in truth he could see little of it. A long time ago
morning had come, a grey morning of swirling snow too thick to
let much light through. He couldn't see the City where it
loomed just beyond the beachhead; he didn't know how near were
the City's hospices and hotels. Up the snow-encrusted sands he
stumbled, clumsy on his skis. Once, he clacked one ski hard
against the other and almost tripped. He checked himself by
ramming his bear spear into the snow, but the
60
 force of his near fall sent a shooting pain into his shoulder.
(Sometime in the night, while he was thawing his toes for the
third time, he had set his poles down and lost them. It was a
shameful lack of mindfulness, a mistake a full man would never
make.) His joints clicked and ground together. He made his way
over the wind-packed ridges of bureesha running up and down the
length of the beach. Little new snow had accumulated on the
island; the wind, he knew, must have blown it away. The
bureesha was really bureldra, thick old ribs of snow too hard
for skiing. He would have taken his skis off, but he was afraid
of losing them, too. He peered through the white spindrift
swirling all around him. It was impossible to see more than
fifty feet in any direction. Ahead of him, where the beach
ended, there should be a green and white forest. If he were
lucky, there would be yu trees with red berries ready for
picking. And stands of snow pine and bonewood thickets, birds
and sleekits and baldo nuts. From somewhere beyond the cloud of
blinding snow, Ahira called to him. He thought he could hear
his father, the father of his blood, calling, too. He stumbled
on in a wild intensity of spirit far beyond pain or cold or the
fear of death. At last he fell to the snow and cried out, 'O,
Father, I am home!'
   He lay there for a long time, resting. He didn't really have
the strength to move any further, but move he must or he would
never move again.
'Danlo, Danlo.'
 Ahira was still calling him; he heard his low, mournful
hooing carried along by the wind. He rose slowly and moved up
the beach toward Ahira's voice. Closer he came, and the sound
drew out, piercing him to the bone. His senses suddenly
cleared. He realized it wasn't the voice of the snowy owl at
all. It was something else, something that sounded like music.
In truth, it was the most beautifully haunting music he had
ever imagined hearing. He wanted the music to go on forever, on
and on, but all at once, it died.
61
   And then, at the head of the beach, through the spindrift,
he beheld a fantastic sight: a group of six men stood in a
half-circle around a strange animal unfamiliar to Danlo.
Strange are the paths of the Unreal City, he reminded himself.
The animal was taller than any of the men, taller even than
Three-Fingered Soli, who was the tallest man he had ever seen.
He – Danlo could tell that the animal was male from the
peculiar-looking sexual organs hanging down from his belly – he
was rearing up on his hind legs like a bear. Why, he wondered,
were the men standing so close? Didn't they realize the animal
might strike out at any instant? And where were their spears?
Danlo looked at the men's empty hands; they had no spears. No
spears! he marvelled, and even though they were dressed much as
he was, in white fur parkas, they wore no skis. How could these
shadow-men hunt animals across snow using neither spears nor
skis?
 Danlo approached as quietly as he could; he could be very
quiet when he had to be. None of the men looked his way, and
that was strange. There was something about the men's faces and
in their postures that was not quite right. They were not
alert, not sensitive to the sounds or vibrations of the world.
The animal was the first to notice him. He was as slender as an
otter; his fur was white and dense like that of a shagshay
bull. He stood too easily on his legs. No animal, Danlo
thought, should be so sure and graceful on two legs. The animal
was holding in his paw some kind of stick, though Danlo
couldn't guess what an animal would be doing with a stick,
unless he had been building a nest when the men surprised him.
The animal was staring at Danlo, watching him in a strange and
knowing manner. He had beautiful eyes, soulful and round and
golden like the sun. Not even Ahira had such large eyes; never
had Danlo seen eyes like that on any animal.
   He moved closer and drew back his spear. He couldn't believe
his good luck. To find a large meat animal so soon after his
landfall was very good luck indeed. He was very
62
hungry; he prayed that he would have the strength to cast the
spear straight and true.
'Danlo, Danlo.'
 It was strange the way the animal stood there watching him,
strange that he hadn't fled or cried out. Something had cried
out, though. He thought it must be Ahira reminding him that he
was required to say a silent prayer for the animal's spirit
before he killed him. But he didn't know the animal's name, so
how could he pray for him? Perhaps the Song of Life told the
names of the Unreal City's strange animals. For the thousandth
time, he lamented not hearing the whole Song before Soli had
died.
 Just then, one of the men turned to see what the animal was
staring at. 'Oh!' the man shouted, 'oh, oh, oh!'
 The other men turned too, looking at him with his spear arm
cocked, and their eyes were wide with astonishment.
   Danlo was instantly in shock. He could finally see that Soli
had told the truth. The shadow-men's faces were much more like
his own lean, beardless face than the rugged Alaloi faces of
his near-fathers. And here was the thought that shocked and
shamed him: what if the animal were imakla? What if these
beardless men knew the animal was imakla and may not be hunted
under any circumstances? Wouldn't the men of the City know
which of their strange animals was a magic animal and which was
not?
'No!' one of the men shouted, 'no, no, no!'
   Danlo was ravenous, exhausted, and confused. Because of the
wind and the spindrift stinging his eyes, he was having trouble
seeing. He stood with his spear held back behind his head. His
whole body trembled, and the spearpoint wavered up and down.
 Many things happened all at once. Slowly, the animal opened
his large, mobile lips and began making sounds. The man who
had shouted, 'Oh!' shouted again and flung himself at the
animal, or rather, tried to cover him with his body. Three of
the others ran at Danlo, shouting and
63
 waving their arms and hands. They grabbed him and wrenched
the spear from his hand. They held him tightly. They were not
nearly so strong as Alaloi men, but they were still men, still
strong enough to hold a starved, frightened boy.
 One of the men holding him – remarkably, his skin was as
black as charred wood – said something to the animal. Someone
else was shouting, and Danlo couldn't make out what he said. It
sounded like gobbledygook. And then, still more remarkably, the
animal began to speak words. Danlo couldn't understand the
words. In truth, he had never thought there might be languages
other than his own, but he somehow knew that the animal was
conversing in a strange language with the men, and they with
him. There was a great yet subtle consciousness about this
animal, a purusha shining with the clarity and brilliance of a
diamond. Danlo looked at him more closely, at the golden eyes
and especially at the paws that seemed more like hands than
paws. Was he an animal with a man's soul or a man with a
deformed body? Shaida is the way of the man who kills other
men. O blessed God! he thought again, he had almost killed that
which may not be killed.
'Lo ni yujensa!' Danlo said aloud. 'I did not know!'
 The animal walked over to him and touched his forehead. He
spoke more words impossible to understand. He smelled of
something familiar, a pungent odour almost like crushed pine
needles.
   'Danlo los mi nabra,' Danlo said, formally giving the animal
and the men his name. It was his duty to trade names and
lineages at the first opportunity. He tapped his chest with his
forefinger. 'I am Danlo, son of Haidar.'
   The black man holding him nodded his head severely. He poked
Danlo in the chest and nodded again. 'Danlo,' he said. 'Is that
what they call you? What language are you speaking? Where did
you come from that you can't speak the language of the
Civilized Worlds? Danlo the Wild. A wild boy from nowhere
carrying a spear.'
64
  Danlo, of course, understood nothing of what the man said,
other than the sound of his own name. He didn't know it was a
crime to brandish weapons in the City. He couldn't guess that
with his wind-chewed face and his wild eyes, he had frightened
the civilized men of Neverness. In truth, it was really he who
was frightened; the men held him so tightly he could hardly
breathe.
 But the animal did not seem frightened at all. He was
scarcely perturbed, looking at him in a kindly way and smiling.
His large mouth fell easily into a kind of permanent, sardonic
smile. 'Danlo,' he repeated, and he touched Danlo's eyelids.
His fingernails were black and shaped like claws, but otherwise
his exceedingly long hands were almost human. 'Danlo.'
He had almost killed that which may not be killed.
   'Oh, ho, Danlo, if that is your name, the men of the City
call me Old Father.' The animal-man placed his hand flat
against his chest and repeated, 'Old Father.'
   More words, Danlo thought. What good were words when the
mind couldn't make sense of words? He shook his head back and
forth, and tried to pull free. He wanted to leave this strange
place where nothing made sense. The shadow-men had faces like
his own, and the animal-man spoke strange, incomprehensible
words, and he had almost killed that which may not be killed
and therefore almost lost his soul.
 Shaida is the cry of the world when it has lost its soul, he
remembered.
   The man-animal continued to speak to him, even though it was
clear that Danlo couldn't understand the words. Old Father
explained that he was a Fravashi, one of the alien races who
live in Neverness. He did this solely to soothe Danlo, for
that is the way of the Fravashi, with their melodious voices
and golden eyes, to soothe and reflect that which is most holy
in human beings. In truth, the Fravashi have other ways, other
reasons for dwelling in human cities. (The Fravashi are the
most human of all
65
aliens, and they live easily in human houses, apartments, and
hospices so long as these abodes are unheated. So human are
they, in their bodies and in their minds, that many believe
them to be one of the lost, carked races of man.) In truth, the
men surrounding Old Father were not hunters at all, but
students. When Danlo surprised them with his spear, Old Father
had been teaching them the art of thinking. Ironically, that
morning in the blinding wind, he had been showing them the way
of ostrenenie, which is the art of making the familiar seem
strange in order to reveal its essence, to reveal hidden
relationships, and above all, truth. And Danlo, of course,
understood none of this. Even if he had known the language of
the Civilized Worlds, its cultural intricacies would have
escaped him. He knew only that Old Father must be very kind and
very wise. He knew it suddenly deep in his aching throat, knew
it with a direct, intuitive knowledge that Old Father would
call buddhi. As Danlo was to learn in the coming days, Old
Father placed great value on buddhi.
 'Lo los sibaru,' Danlo said. Unintentionally, he groaned in
pain. All the way up to his groin, his legs felt as cold as
ice. 'I'm so hungry – do you have any food?' He sighed and
slumped against the arms of the men still holding him. Speech
was useless, he thought. 'Old Father' – whatever the
incomprehensible syllables of that name really meant – couldn't
understand the simplest of questions.
   Danlo was beginning to fall into the exhausted stupor of
starvation when Old Father brought his stick up to his furry
mouth and opened his lips. The stick was really a kind of long
bamboo flute called a shakuhachi. He blew into the shakuhachi's
ivory mouthpiece. And then a beautiful, haunting music spread
out over the beach. It was the same music Danlo had followed
earlier, a piercing, numinous music at once infinitely sad yet
full of infinite possibilities. The music overwhelmed him. And
then everything – the music, the alien's strange new words, the
pain of his frozen feet – became unbearable. He fainted.
66
After a while, he began to rise through the cold, snowy layers
of consciousness where all world's sensa are as hazy and
inchoate as an ice-fog. He was too ravished with hunger to gain
full lucidity, but one thing he would always remember:
astonishingly, with infinite gentleness, Old Father reached out
to open his clenched fist and then pressed the shakuhachi's
long, cool shaft into his hand. He gave it to him as a gift.
 Why? Danlo wondered. Why had he almost killed that which may
not be killed?
   For an eternity he wondered about all the things that he
knew, wondered about shaida and the sheer strangeness of the
world. Then he clutched the shakuhachi in his hand, closed his
eyes, and the cold dark tide of unknowing swept him under.
67



CHAPTER THREE
The Glavering

The Dark God feared that the Fravashi might one day see the
universe as it really is, and so might come to challenge him.
Therefore, he implanted in each one an organ called a glaver
which would distort his perceptions and cause him to mistake
illusion for reality.
'How effective is the glaver?' asks the Unfulfilled Father.
 'Go look in a mirror,' answers the First Least Father, 'and
you will see the effectiveness of the glaver.'
 – Fravashi parable

In a way, Danlo was very lucky to encounter Old Father and his
students before any others. The Unreal City – its proper name
is Neverness – can be a cold, harsh, inhospitable city to the
many strangers who come to her seeking their fates. Neverness
is roughly divided into four quarters, and the Zoo, where Danlo
came to land, is the most inhospitable of them all, at least
for human beings. The Darghinni District and the Fayoli Flats,
the Elidi Mews – in which of the Zoo's alien sanctuaries or
strange-smelling dens could he have hoped for succour? While it
is not true that the Scutari, for instance, murder men for
their meat, neither are those wormlike, cannibalistic aliens
famous for goodwill or aid to the wretched. Had Danlo wandered
up from the Darghinni Sands into the Scutari District, he would
have found a maze of cluster-cells. And in each cell, through
translucent wax walls as high as a man, the many waiting eyes
of a Scutari clutch staring at whatever passed by. Danlo would
never have found
68
his way out of the confusing mesh of streets; there he
certainly would have died, of neglect or cold, or, if hunger
further deranged his wits and he dared to break open a
cluster-cell with his spear, he would have suffocated in a
cloud of carbon monoxide. And then the Scutari would have eaten
him, even the toenails and bones. Those peculiar aliens believe
that meat must never be wasted, and more, they avow that they
have a holy duty to scavenge meat whenever fate offers them the
chance.
 Old Father brought Danlo to his house in the Fravashi
District. Or rather, he bade his students to carry Danlo. The
Fathers of the Fravashi – the Least Fathers, the Unfulfilled
and the Old Fathers – do not like to perform physical labour of
any sort. They consider it beneath their dignity. And Old
Father was in many ways a typical Fravashi. He liked to think,
and he liked to teach, and mostly, he liked to teach human
beings how to think. It was his reason for living, at least
during this last, deep winter phase of his life. In truth,
teaching was his joy. Like every Old Father, he lived with his
students in one of the many sprawling, circular houses at the
heart of the Farsider's Quarter. (The Fravashi District is the
only alien district not located in the Zoo. In every way it is
unique. Only there do human beings and aliens live side by
side. In fact, human beings have fairly taken over the district
and greatly outnumber the Fravashi.) Old Father had a house
just off the City Wild, which is the largest of all Neverness's
natural parks or woods. It was a one-storey, stone house:
concentric, linking rooms built around a circular apartment
that Old Father called his thinking chamber. In a city of
densely arrayed spires and towers where space is valuable, such
houses are – and were – an extravagance. But they are a
necessary extravagance. The Fravashi cannot enter any dwelling
where others might walk above their heads. Some say this is the
Fravashi's single superstition; others point out that all
Fravashi buildings are roofed with a clear dome,
69
and that the sight of the sky, day or night, is vital to clear
thinking.
   Almost no one doubts that the Fravashi themselves have
played a crucial part in the vitality of Neverness, and
therefore, in the vitality of the Order. Three thousand years
ago, the pilots of the Order of Mystic Mathematicians and Other
Seekers of the Ineffable Flame crossed over into the bright
Sagittarius Arm of the galaxy and founded Neverness. Two
hundred years later, the first Fravashi came to the City of
Light, and they taught their alien mental arts of hallning,
shih, and ostrenenie. And the Order thrived. To learn, to
journey, to illuminate, to begin – that is the motto of the
Order. Only, would the pilots – and the cetics, ecologists and
others – ever have learned so well if the Fravashi hadn't come
to teach them? So, no one doubts that the Fravashi have given
the Order the finest of mind tools, but many believe that, like
a bloodfruit squeezed of its juice, their teachings are old and
dry. The Age of the Fravashi is two millennia dead, the
naysayers proclaim. The Fravashi District with all its squat
stone houses is an anachronism, they say, and should be razed
to the ground. Fortunately, for the Fravashi and for all the
peoples of Neverness (and for the boy everyone was calling
Danlo the Wild), the Lords of the Order who run the City
cherish anachronisms.
   Danlo was given a room just off Old Father's thinking
chamber. Like all of the students' rooms, it was austere,
nearly barren of furniture or decoration. No rug or fur covered
the polished wood floors; the walls were hexagonal granite
blocks cut with exactitude and fit together without mortar.
Beneath the skylight, at one end of the curved room, there was
a low, platform bed. Danlo lay in this bed for many days,
recuperating from his journey. While he was still unconscious,
Old Father invited a cryologist and a cutter to his house.
These professionals thawed Danlo's feet and repaired his
damaged tissue, layer by layer. When the body's water
crystallizes into ice, it expands and ruptures the cells,
especially the fine network
70
of capillaries vital to the flow of the blood. Gangrene becomes
inevitable. The cutter could find no gangrene, however, because
Danlo's feet had not had time to rot. The cutter, a dour little
man off one of the made-worlds of Camilla Luz, took Old Father
aside and told him, The boy has starved – I can't tell you why.
You say he speaks a language no one can understand. Well, he's
obviously new to the City. Perhaps his parents have died and he
doesn't know that food is free here. Or perhaps he's an autist;
he wouldn't be the first autist to wander around and starve to
death. I've put some nutrients back into his blood. He'll wake
up soon, and then he'll need to eat, juices at first, and then
fruits and starches and anything else he wants. He should
recover quickly, however...'
   Old Father was standing at the foot of Danlo's bed,
listening carefully, as the Fravashi always listen. He waited
for the cutter to continue, and when he did not, he said,
'Ahhh, is there a difficulty?'
 'There's something you should see,' the cutter said, pointing
to Danlo, who was sleeping on his back. The cutter pulled back
the covers and showed Old Father the cut membrum, the brightly
coloured scars running up and down the shaft. This mutilation
was done recently, within the last half year. Perhaps the boy
is sick in his mind and has mutilated himself. Or perhaps ...
well, this is a city of cults and bizarre sects, isn't it? I've
never seen this kind of thing before, but that doesn't mean
anything. I've heard a story that the boy tried to kill you
with an archaic weapon. What do you call it? – with a spear. Is
that true? No, don't tell me, I don't want to have to repeat
what may be only rumours. But be careful, Honoured Fravashi.
I'm no cetic, but anyone could read the wildness on this boy's
face. What is it they're calling him, Danlo the Wild?'
   Later that afternoon Danlo awakened, and he spent most of
the next tenday in his bed, eating and sleeping. The other
students brought him food, rich meat soups sloshing in bowls,
and fruits and breads heaped atop the mosaic
71
plates Old Father had transported from his birth world.
Although Danlo couldn't speak to the students, he kept them
very busy. Possibly no other people can eat as much as hungry
Alaloi. And Danlo, while not an Alaloi by heredity, had learned
to 'eat for a season', as they say. He devoured yu berries in
cream, roasted snow apples, and bloodfruits. He had his first
awkward experience with wheat noodles, and a hundred other
strange foods of the Civilized Worlds. There was nothing he did
not like, even the yellow-skinned, sickly sweet fruit called a
banana. He liked to eat and wonder at all that had happened, to
eat again and sink down with a full belly into the delicious
warmth of his bed. In truth, of all the marvels of
civilization, he thought his bed was the most marvellous. The
mattress was soft yet resilient and had a good smell.
Wonderfully soft underfurs covered him. They weren't the kind
of furs he was used to; they were something finer, millions of
individual strands of shagshay silk twisted into fibres and
woven together into what one of Old Father's students called a
sheet. Danlo couldn't imagine any woman making the effort to
weave such a sheet. How long would it take? And the brown and
white blankets were also woven, of shagshay wool. They were not
quite as soft as the sheets, but still soft enough to lay his
face against while he curled up and let the heat lull him to
sleep.
   As the days passed, however, his contentment gave way to a
hundred doubts and worries. His mind cleared, and the sheer
unnaturalness of his new life made him uneasy. The ways of the
students who came and went were inexplicable. How did they cook
the food they brought him? What kind of meat had he eaten? What
were the animals' names – he had to know the names of the dead
animals who gave him life so that he could pray for their
spirits. Didn't these people understand the simplest of things?
And as for that, how many people lived in this monstrous stone
hut? He had counted six other students in addition to those he
had met on the beach – four of them women. He won-
72

 dered if they were all near-brothers and near-sisters? How
could they be? Some had faces as white as that of a fatfish; a
few, like the black man on the beach, must have burned their
skins in a fire. All of them seemed to be of an age with his
found-parents, Haidar and Chandra, though with their strange,
weak, civilized faces it was hard to determine their years.
Where were the old ones of this strange tribe? Where were their
children? Why hadn't he heard the babies crying in the deeper
parts of the hut?
  Three times Old Father came to visit him. Again Danlo was
stunned by his inability to decide if this creature were man or
animal. No man, he thought, could breathe through such a tiny
black nose; no man had such long graceful limbs or such a
delicacy of mouth and face. But then no animal had eyes like
the sun, all golden and burning with awareness. And neither
animal nor man could boast the profligacy of sexual organs
which dangled between Old Father's legs. His stones were not
visible (the long, white belly fur probably covered them, he
thought), but his membrum was huge and unique. In truth, his
membrum was not a singular organ; all Fravashi males possess
hemipenes, two huge connected tubes of flesh, one atop the
other. Old Father took no care to cover himself or stand so
that one of his legs might obscure this remarkable sight. He
was clothed only in his shiny fur and his disdain for the human
emotion of shame. 'Danlo,' he said, and his voice was like
music. 'Danlo the Wild, let us play the shakuhachi.'
  Without any more words, Old Father indicated that Danlo
should remove the bamboo flute from beneath his pillow, where
he always kept it. He showed him the fingering, how to place
his fingers on the holes up and down the shaft; he showed him
how to blow into the ivory mouthpiece. Danlo took to the
instrument immediately. Soon, he too was playing music, and Old
Father left him alone to see what he might discover for
himself. (The Fravashi do not like to teach things. Their whole
art has
73
evolved to find a way of teaching, rather than things to teach.
In fact, the untranslatable Fravashi word for learning means
something like The Way'.) The pure notes and little melodies
that Danlo coaxed from the shakuhachi were simple and
unrefined, but for all that, had a power over him hard to
understand. The music was haunting and soothing at the same
time. After a while, after many long evenings of watching the
stars through the skylight and making music, he concluded that
the shakuhachi's sound soothed him precisely because it was
haunting. Like Ahira's lonely cry, it called to the wildness
inside and made him poignantly glad to be alive. It alerted him
to possibilities. Only in this heightened state could he put
aside his day to day anticipations and restlessness and listen
to the holy music of life singing in his blood. The Song of
Life – he played the shakuhachi, and its pure tones recalled
the altjiranga mitjina, the dreamtime. Often, he let the music
carry him along into the dreamtime. Like a wounded bird seeking
refuge on a mountain ledge, he dwelt in the dreamtime until he
was whole again. It was a dangerous thing to do, dangerous
because once he developed a taste for the infinite, how should
he return to the everyday world of snow and frozen slush and
pain? There must always be time for simply living. Somewhere,
at the end of the shakuhachi's sound where it rushed like a
stream of liquid light, there must be a balance and a harmony;
there must always be halla. Yes, he thought, it was dangerous
to play the shakuhachi, and it was very dangerous to seek
halla, but, in truth, he loved this kind of danger.
   Few come to such self-knowledge so young. Danlo applied this
knowledge and began to savour not only music but the
bewildering experiences of his new world. One of the women –
she had golden hair and he thought her name was Fayeth – showed
him how to eat with tools called chopsticks. His clumsiness and
ineptitude with the wooden sticks did not embarrass him. In
full sight of the curious students who often came to watch him,
he would
74
put his chopsticks aside, shovel handfuls of noodles into his
mouth, and wipe his greasy hands on his face when he was done.
He thought there must be something wrong with civilized people
that they didn't want to touch their food, as if they required
a separation from life or things which had once been alive. And
they were ignorant of the most basic knowledge. Adjacent to his
room was another room, which was really more of a closet than a
room. Every morning he entered this closet, squatted, and
dropped his dung through a hole in the floor, dropped it into a
curious-looking device called a multrum. He pissed in the
multrum too, and here was the thing that frustrated him: the
hole to the multrum was almost flush with the closet's north
wall; it was hard to position himself with his back to the wall
without falling in the hole. But he had to stand in this
cramped, awkward position in order to piss to the south. Didn't
the civilized makers of this dung closet know that a man must
always piss to the south? Apparently not. And as for the dung
itself, what happened to it once it fell through the hole? How
was it returned to the world? Did dung beetles live in the
multrum or other animals which would consume his excretions? He
didn't know.
 Despite a hundred like uncertainties, he quickly put on
muscle and flesh; soon he was able to walk easily again, and
this amazed him for he kept waiting for his toes to blacken
with the fleshrot. He was given to understand he was not
welcome to leave his room, so he began pacing, pacing and
pivoting when he reached the far wall, and then, because he was
in many ways still just a boy, running back and forth to burn
off the prodigious amounts of food he ate. Someone gave him a
pair of fur slippers, and he discovered that after getting up
his speed with a little running, he could slide across the
polished floor almost as if it were wet ice. In this way he
amused himself – when he wasn't playing his shakuhachi – until
his loneliness and curiosity became unbearable. It would be
unseemly of him to ignore the wishes of his elders and leave
his room, but
75
 surely, he thought, it was even more unseemly of Old Father
and his family to leave a guest alone.
   One night, after the others had gone to bed (or so he
presumed), he set out to explore the house. He threw the
blanket around his shoulders and put on his slippers; otherwise
he was naked. His filthy furs, of course, had been taken away
for burning, and he had been given no new ones. It didn't occur
to him that the others might believe the shame of his nakedness
would be enough to confine him to his room. Indeed, there was
nothing else to confine him. The Fravashi do not believe living
spaces should be enclosed by doors, so Danlo had no trouble
entering the narrow hallway outside his room. From one end of
the curving hallway came a reverberant, rhythmic sound, as of
someone chanting; from the other, silence and the smell of
crushed pine needles. He followed the silence, followed the
piney aroma which grew stronger with every step he took.
Hexagonal granite blocks lined the hallway; they were icy to
the touch and picked up the faint whisper of his furry slippers
against the floor. Cold flame globes, spaced every twenty feet,
gave off a many-hued light. He marvelled at the flowing blues
and reds, and he might have killed himself sticking his hand
inside one, but the globes were high above his head and he
couldn't reach them, not even with the probing end of his
shakuhachi. In silence, he followed the flame globes down the
hallway as it spiralled inward to the centre of the house.
 Inevitably, he came to Old Father's thinking chamber. Old
Father was sitting on a Fravashi carpet at the room's exact
midpoint, but Danlo didn't notice him at first because he was
too busy gawking at all the extraordinary things. He had never
imagined seeing so many things in one place: against the
circular wall were wooden chests, gosharps, ancient books,
heaumes of various computers, sulki grids, and cabinets
displaying the sculpted art of fifty different races; a hundred
and six different musical instruments,
76
 most of them alien, were set out on shelves. No spot of the
floor was uncovered; carpets lined the room, in many places
overlapping, one intricately woven pattern clashing against
another. Everywhere, in huge clay pots, grew plants from other
worlds. Danlo stared at this profusion of things so at odds
with the rest of the house. (Or the little he had seen of it.)
Many believe the Fravashi should live in the same austerity
they demand of their students, but in fact, they do not. They
are thingists of the most peculiar sort: they collect things
not for status or out of compulsion, but rather to stimulate
their thinking.
   'Danlo,' came a melodious voice from the room's depths, 'Ni
luria la, ni luria manse vi Alaloi, Danlo the Wild, son of
Haidar.'
 Danlo's head jerked and he looked at Old Father in surprise.
Old Father didn't seem surprised to see him. And even if he had
been surprised, the Fravashi strive at all times to maintain an
attitude of zanshin, a state of relaxed mental alertness in the
face of danger or surprise.
   'Shantih,' Danlo said, automatically replying to the
traditional greeting of his people. He shook his head,
wondering how the man-animal had learned this greeting.
'Shantih, sir. Peace beyond peace. But I thought you did not
know the words of human language.'
   Old Father motioned for Danlo to sit across from him on the
carpet. Danlo sat cross-legged and ran his fingers across the
carpet's thick pile; the tessellation of white and black birds
– or animals that looked like birds – fascinated him.
 'Ah ho, while you were healing these last ten days, I learned
your language.'
 Danlo himself hadn't been able to learn much of the language
of the civilized people; he couldn't understand how anyone
could comprehend all the strange words of another and put them
together properly. 'Is that possible?' he asked.
'It's not possible for a human being, at least not without
77
 an imprinting. But the Fathers of the Fravashi are very good
at learning languages and manipulating sounds, ah ha? At the
Academy, in the linguists' archives, there are records of many
archaic and lost languages.'
   Danlo rubbed his stomach and blinked. Even though Old Father
was speaking the human language, the only language that could
aspire to true humanity in its expression of the Song of Life,
he was using the words in strange, hard to understand ways. He
suddenly felt nauseous, as if nothing in the world would ever
make sense again. 'What do you mean by an "imprinting"? What is
this Academy? And where are the others, the black man who held
me on the beach? The woman with the golden hair? Where are my
clothes? My spear? Does every hut in the Unreal City possess a
bathing room? How is it that hot water can run through a tube
and spill out into a bowl? Where does it come from? How is it
heated? And what is a Fravashi? Are you a man or an animal? And
where– '
   Old Father whistled softly to interrupt him. The Fravashi
are the most patient of creatures, but they like to conduct
conversation in an orderly manner.
   'Ahhh, you will have many questions,' he said. 'As I have
also. Let us take the most important questions one at a time
and not diverge too far with the lesser questions that will
arise. Human beings, diverging modes of thought – oh no, it's
not their strength. Now, to begin, I am a Fravashi of the
Faithful Thoughtplayer Clan, off the world of Fravashing, as
human beings call it. I am, in fact, an animal, as you are. Of
course, it's almost universal for human languages to separate
man from the rest of the animal kingdom.'
   Danlo nodded his head, though he didn't believe that Old
Father really understood the only human language that mattered.
Certainly man was of the animal kingdom; the essence of the
Song of Life was man's connectedness to all the things of the
world. But man was that which may not be hunted, and only man
could anticipate the
78
great journey to the other side of day. Men prayed for the
spirits of the animals they killed; animals didn't pray for
men. 'You are a Fravashi? From another world? Another star?
Then it is true, the lights in the sky burn with life! Life
lives among the stars, yes?'
   'So, it's so. There is life on many planets,' Old Father
corrected. 'How is it that you weren't certain of this?'
   Danlo brushed his knuckles against the rug's soft wool. His
face was hot with shame; suddenly he hated that he seemed to
know so little and everyone else so much.
'Where do you come from, Danlo?'
 In a soft voice, which broke often from the strain of
remembering painful things, Danlo told of his journey across
the ice. He did not tell of the slow evil and the death of his
people because he was afraid for Old Father to know that the
Devaki had been touched with shaida.
   Old Father closed his eyes for a while as he listened. He
opened them and looked up through the skylight. Danlo thought
there was something strange about his consciousness. It seemed
to soar like a flock of kitikeesha, to divide and regroup
without warning and change directions as if pursued by a snowy
owl.
   'Ahhh, that is a remarkable story,' Old Father said at last.
   'I am sorry I rose my spear to you, sir. I might have killed
you, and this would have been a very bad thing because you seem
as mindful and aware as a man.'
 'Thank you,' Old Father said. 'Oh ho, I have the awareness of
a man – this is a rare compliment indeed, thank you!'
   'You are welcome,' Danlo said very seriously. He hadn't yet
developed an ear for Fravashi sarcasm, and in his naive way, he
accepted Old Father's words without looking for hidden meaning.
'You seem as aware as a man,' he repeated, 'and yet, on the
beach, you made no move to defend yourself. Nor did you seem
afraid.'
'Would you really have killed me?'
79
'I was very hungry.'
 'Oh ho!' Old Father said, 'there is an old, old rule: even
though you would kill me, I may not kill you. The rule of
ahimsa. It is better to die oneself than to kill. So, it's so:
never killing, never. Never killing or hurting another, not
even in your thoughts.'
   'But, sir, the animals were made for hunting. When there is
hunger, it is good to kill – even the animals know this.'
'Is that true?'
 Danlo nodded his head with certainty. 'If there were no
killing, the world would be too full of animals, and soon there
would be no animals anywhere because they would all starve.'
 Old Father closed both eyes then quickly opened them. He
looked across the room at one of his shelves of musical
instruments. As he appeared to study a collection of wooden
flutes which looked similar to Danlo's shakuhachi, he said,
'Danlo the Wild – if you really lived among the Alaloi, you're
well named.'
'I was born into the Devaki tribe.'
 'I've heard of the Devaki. They're Alaloi, like the other
tribes even further to the west, isn't that true?'
'Why should I lie to you?'
 Old Father looked at him and smiled. 'It's known that when
the ancestors of the Alaloi first came to this world, they
carked themselves, their flesh. Ah ha, carked every part into
the shape of very ancient, primitive human beings called
Neanderthals.'
'Neanderthals?'
 'The Alaloi have hairy bodies like Neanderthals, muscles and
bones as thick as yu trees, faces like granite mountains, ah
ho! You will forgive me if I observe that you don't look very
much like a Neanderthal.'
   Danlo didn't understand what Old Father meant by 'cark'.
How, he wondered, could anyone change the shape of his body?
And weren't the Devaki of the world? Hadn't
80
they emerged from the Great Womb of Time on the first morning
of the world? That the Devaki looked much as Old Father said,
however, he could not deny.
  'My father and mother,' he said, 'were of the Unreal City.
They made the journey to Kweitkel where I was born. They died,
and Haidar and Chandra adopted me.'
   Old Father smiled and nodded politely. For the Fravashi,
smiling is as easy as breathing, though they have learned the
awkward custom of head nodding only with difficulty. 'How old
are you, Danlo?'
 He started to tell Old Father that he was thirteen years old,
but then remembered that he must have passed his fourteenth
birthday at the end of deep winter, somewhere out on the ice.
'I have lived fourteen years.'
'Do fourteen-year-old Devaki boys leave their parents?'
 Again, Danlo's face burned with shame. He didn't want to
explain how his parents had died. He pulled back the blanket
covering his groin and pointed to his membrum. 'I have been
cut, yes? You can see I am a man. A man may journey where he
must.'
   'Ah ha, a man!' Old Father repeated. 'What is it like to be
a man at such a young age?'
   'Only a man would know,' Danlo answered playfully. And then,
after a moment of reflection, he said, 'It is hard – very
hard.'
   He smiled at Old Father, and in silence and understanding
his smile was returned. Old Father had the kindest smile he
could have imagined. Sitting with him was a comfort almost as
deep as sitting in front of the flickering oilstones on a cold
night. And yet, there was something else about him that he
couldn't quite define, something not so comforting at all. At
times, Old Father's awareness of him seemed almost too intense,
like the hellish false winter sun. At other times, his
attention wandered, or rather, hardened to include Danlo as
merely one of the room's many objects, and then his intellect
seemed as cold as glacier ice.
81
   'Oh ho, Danlo the Wild, I should tell you something.' Old
Father laced his long fingers together and rested his chin in
his hands. 'Most people will doubt your story. You might want
to be careful of what you say.'
   'Why? Why should I be careful? You think I have lied to you,
but no, I have not. The truth is the truth. Am I a satinka
that I would lie to others just for the sport? No, I am not a
liar, and now it is time for me to thank you for your
hospitality and continue my journey.'
 He was attempting to stand when Old Father placed a hand on
his shoulder and said, 'Sit a while longer. Ho, ho! I can hear
the truth in what you say, but others do not have this
ability. And, of course, even hearing the truth is not the
same as knowing it.'
'What do you mean?'
   Old Father whistled slowly, then said, This will be hard for
you to understand. But so, it's so: It is possible for a human
being to cast away true memories and implant new ones. False
ones.'
   'But memory is memory – how can memory be cast away?'
'Ah, oh, there are ways, Danlo.'
 'And how can memories be implanted? Who would want to
remember something unreal?'
 'Oh ho, but there are many people who desire false memories,
a new reality, you see. They seek the thrill of newness. To
cark the mind in the same way they cark the body. Some people
sculpt their bodies to resemble aliens or according to whatever
shape is fashionable; some like to be aliens, to know a wholly
different experience. Most people will conclude that you, Danlo
the Wild, must have merely imprinted the Alaloi reality.'
'But why?'
   'To be what you want to be: isn't this the essence of being
human?'
'I do not know.' Danlo said truthfully.
Old Father smiled, then bowed his head politely, in
82
respect for the seriousness of effort with which Danlo received
his words. Painfully, with infinite care and slowness, he arose
to make some tea. 'Ahhh!' he grunted, 'ohhh!' His hips clicked
and popped with arthritis; he could have gone to any cutter in
the Farsider's Quarter and ordered new hips, but he disdained
bodily rejuvenations of any sort. He crossed the room, opened a
wood cabinet, and from a shiny blue pot poured steaming tea
into two mugs. Danlo saw no fire or glowing oilstones; he
couldn't guess how the tea was heated. Old Father returned and
handed him one of the mugs. 'I thought you might enjoy some
mint tea. You must find it cold in this room.'
   Indeed, Danlo was nearly shivering. The rest of the house –
his room and the hallway at least – were warmed by hot air
which mysteriously gusted out of vents on the floor, but Old
Father's thinking chamber was almost as cold as a snow hut.
Danlo sat with his knees pulled up to his chest and wrapped his
blanket tightly around himself. He took a sip of tea. It was
delicious, at once cool and hot, pungent and sweet. He sat
there sipping his tea, thinking about everything Old Father had
told him. From the hallway, reverberating along the winding
spiral of stone, came the distant sound of voices. Old Father
explained that the students were chanting in their rooms,
repeating their nightly mantras, the word drugs which would
soothe their minds. Danlo sipped his tea and listened to the
music of the word drugs, and after a while, he began digging
around in his nostril for some pieces of what the Alaloi call
'nose ice'. According to the only customs he knew, he savoured
his tea and ate the contents of his nose. The Alaloi do not
like to waste food, and they will eat almost anything capable
of being digested.
   With a smile Old Father watched him and said. There is
something you should know about the men and women of the City,
if you don't know it already, ah ho, ah ha!'
'Yes?'
83
   'Every society – even alien societies – prescribe behaviours
which are permitted and those which are not. Do you
understand?'
 Danlo knew well enough what was seemly for a man to do – or
so he thought. Was it possible, he asked himself, that the
Song of Life told of other behaviours that the Alaloi men
practised when they were not around the women and children?
Behaviours that he was unaware of? Or could the men of the
City have their own Song? Obviously, they did not know right
from wrong, or how could they have given him food to eat and
not told him the names of the eaten animals?
   'I think I understand,' he said, as he rolled some nose ice
between his fingers and popped the little green ball into his
mouth.
 Old Father was still for a moment, then he whistled a
peculiar low tiralee out of the side of his mouth. One eye was
shut, the other open, a great, golden sun shining down on
Danlo. The music he made was strange, evocative, and
compelling. He continued to whistle out the corner of his
mouth, while his remarkably mobile lips shaped words on the
other side. 'You must understand,' he finally said, 'among the
Civilized Worlds, in general, there is a hierarchy of disgust
of orifices. So, it's so.' He whistled continuously,
accompanying and punctuating his speech with an alien tune. 'In
sight of others, or even alone, it is less disgusting to put
one's finger in the mouth than in the ear. Ha, ha, but it is
more acceptable to probe the nose than either urethra or anus.
Fingernails, cut hair, callouses and such are never eaten.'
 'Civilized people do not eat nose ice, yes?' Danlo said. He
suddenly realized that the city people must be as insane as a
herd of mammoths who have gorged on fermented snow apples.
Insane it was to imprint false memories, if that were really
possible. And to eat animals and not say a prayer for their
spirits – insane. Insane people would not know halla; they
might not even know it existed. He
84
nodded his head as if all the absurdities he had seen the past
days made sense.
 'And what of a woman's yoni?' he asked. He took a sip of tea.
'What level does this orifice occupy in the disgust hierarchy?'
   Old Father opened his eye and shut the other. He smiled and
said, 'Ahhh, that is more difficult to determine. Among some
groups of humans, the yoni may never be touched with the
fingers, not even in private by the woman herself. Especially
not in private. Other cultures practise the art of orgy and
require touching by many, in public; they may even allow one
orifice, such as the mouth, to open onto the yoni.'
   Danlo made a sour face. Ever since he was eleven years old,
he had enjoyed love play with the girls and young women of his
tribe. Even among the wanton Devaki, certain practices were
uncommon. Some men liked to lick women's slits, and they were
scorned and called 'fish eaters', though no one would think to
tell them what they should and should not eat. Of course, no
one would lick a woman while she was bleeding or after she had
given birth, nor would they touch her at these times. In truth,
a man may not look a woman in the eyes when she is passing
blood or tissue of any sort – could it be that the people of
the Civilized Worlds were insane and did not know this?
 'Danlo, are you all right?' Old Father asked. 'You look ill.'
   Danlo was not ill, but he was not quite all right. He was
suddenly afraid that Fayeth and the other women of Old Father's
house would not know to turn their eyes away during their
thirtyday bleedings. What if their eyes touched his and the
blood of their menses coloured his vision with the power of the
women's mysteries? And then a more despairing thought: how
could a sane man ever hope to live in an insane world?
'You seem to understand these ... people,' he said to
85
Old Father. He rubbed his belly and then stared at Old
Father's belly, or rather stared below it at his furry double
membrum. And then he suddenly asked, 'Do the Fravashi women
have two yonis? Do the Fravashi also have a hierarchy of
disgust of orifices?'
 'No,' Old Father said. He finished the last of his tea and
set the mug down on the carpet. The answer is "no" to both of
your questions.'
'Then why do you have two membrums?'
   'Ah ha, so impatient! You see, the top membrum,' and here he
reached between his legs, hefted his membrum in his cupped
fingers, and pulled the foreskin back to reveal the moist, red
bulb, 'is used only for sex. The lower membrum is for
pissing.'
'Oh.'
   Old Father continued whistling and said, There is no disgust
hierarchy. But, oh ho, the younger Fravashi, some of them, are
disgusted that human males use the same tube for both pissing
and sex, much as everyone is disgusted that the Scutari use the
same end of the tube for both eating and excreting.'
 Danlo stared at Old Father's membrum. He wondered how he
could claim to be a man – or rather an elder of his tribe – if
his membrum were uncut. He listened to Old Father's beautiful,
disturbing music for a long while before asking him about this.
 'Ahhh, different peoples,' Old Father said. He stopped
whistling and opened both eyes fully. 'Different brains,
different self-definitions, different ways, aha, aha, oh ho! A
man is a man is a man – a Fravashi: so, it's so, do you see it,
Danlo, the way the mirror reflects everything you think you
know, the way you think? The mirror: it binds you into the
glavering.'
'I do not understand, sir.'
 'Haven't you wondered yet why civilized ways are so different
from those of your Alaloi?'
At that moment, Danlo was wondering that very thing.
86
 He held his breath for a moment because he was afraid that
this unfathomably strange alien animal could reach into his
mind and pull out his thoughts one by one. Finally, he gathered
his courage and looked straight at sun-eyed Old Father. 'Can
you enter my head like a man walks into a cave? Can you see my
thoughts?'
   'Ahhh, of course not. But I can see your thought shadows.'
'Thought shadows?'
 Old Father lifted his face toward the wall where the colours
inside the cold flame globe flickered up through the spectrum,
from red to orange, orange-yellow through violet. He held his
tea cup above the carpet, blocking some of the flame globe's
light. 'As real objects cast shadows by which their shapes may
be determined, so with thoughts. So, it's so: thought shadows.
Your thought shadows are as distinct as the shadow of this cup.
You think that the people of the City – the Fravashi too! –
must be insane.'
'You are looking at my thoughts!'
   Old Father smiled at him then, a smile of reassurance and
pity, but also one of provocation and pain. 'And you are
glavering, ah ho! Glavering, and human beings are the masters
of the glavering. Glavering: being deceitfully kind to
yourself, needlessly flattering the prettiness of your
worldview. Oh, Danlo, you assume your assumptions about the
world are true solely according to your conditioning. What
conditioning, what experience, what uncommon art of living?
Behold the cuts in your membrum. The trees and rocks of the
forest are alive, you say? All life is sacred! Your mother
spoke many words to you, did she not? How do you know what you
know? How did your mother know, and her mother before her? The
Alaloi have two hundred words for ice, so I've learned. What
would you see if you only had one word? What can you see? The
people of Neverness: they have many words for what you know as
simply "thought". Wouldn't you like to learn these words? You
see! When you look out over
87
an ice field, you put on your goggles lest the light blind
you. And so, when you look at the world, you put on the
goggles of custom, habit, and tribal wisdoms lest the truth
make you insane. Ahhh, truth – who wouldn't want to see the
world just as it is? But instead, you see the world reflected
in your own image; you see yourself reflected in the image of
the world. Always. The mirror – it's always there. Glavering,
glavering, glavering. This is what the glavering does: it
fixes our minds in a particular place, in a traditional
knowledge or thoughtway, in a limited conception of ourselves.
And so it binds us to ourselves. And if we are self-bound, how
can we ever see the truths beyond? How can we ever truly see?'
   For a long time Danlo had been staring at Old Father. His
eyes were dry and burning so he rubbed them. But he pressed too
hard, temporarily deforming his corneas, and nothing in the
room seemed to hold its colour or shape. The purple alien
plants ran with streaks of silver and blue light and wavered
like a mirage, like the mithral-landia of a snow-blind
traveller.
 After Danlo's vision had cleared, he said, The Song of Life
tells about the seeing. On the second morning of the world,
when Ahira opened his eyes and saw ... the holy mountain named
Kweitkel, and the ocean's deep waters, unchanging and eternal,
the truth of the world.'
   'Ah ha,' Old Father said, 'I've given you the gift of my
favourite flute, and now I shall give you another, a simple
word: epistane. This is the dependence or need to know a thing
as absolutely true.'
'But, sir, the truth is the truth, yes?'
 'And still I must give you another word, from my lips, into
your mind: epistnor.'
'And what is "epistnor"?'
'Epistnor is the impossibility of knowing absolute truth.'
 'If that is true,' Danlo said with a smile, 'how are we to
know which actions are seemly, and which are not?'
'Ah, ah, a very well-made question!' Old Father sat there
88
humming a beguiling little melody, and for a while, his eyes
were half-closed.
'And what is the answer to the question?' Danlo asked.
   'Oh, ho, I wish I knew. We Fravashi, sad to say, are much
better at asking questions than answering them. However.
However, might it be that one person's truth is another's
insanity?'
 Danlo thought about this as he listened to Old Father whistle
and hum. Something about the music unsettled him and touched
him inside, almost as if the sound waves were striking directly
at his heart and causing it to beat more quickly. He rubbed his
throat, swallowed and said, 'On the beach, when I raised my
spear to slay you, the man with the black skin looked at me as
if I were insane.'
 'Ah, that was impolite of him. But Luister – that's his name
– Luister is a gentle man, the gentlest of men. He's devoted to
ahimsa, and can't bear to see violence made.'
'He calls me "Danlo the Wild".'
'Well, I think you're very wild, still.'
   'Because I hunt animals for food? How does Luister think he
could survive outside this Unreal City without hunting?'
   'And how do you think you will survive in the City without
learning civilized ways?'
 'But if I learn the ways of insane men ... then won't I
become insane, too?'
 'Ah, ha, but the human beings of Neverness have their own
truth, Danlo, as you will see. And hear.'
   Old Father's music intensified, then, and Danlo could feel
its theme in his belly. It was a music of startling new
harmonies, a music pregnant with longing and uncertainty. The
Fravashi Fathers are masters of using music to manipulate the
emotions of body and mind. Ten million years ago, the
ur-Fravashi, in their frightened, scattered herds, had evolved
sound as a defensive weapon against predators; over the
millennia, these primitive sounds had become elaborated into a
powerful music. The frontal lobes
89
 of any Fravashi Father's brain are wholly given over to the
production and interpretation of sound, particularly the
sounds of words and music. They use music as a tool to
humiliate their rivals, or to soothe sick babies, or woo the
unwed females of their clans. In truth, the Fravashi have come
to view reality in musical terms, or rather, to 'hear' the
music reverberating in all things. Each mind, for them, has a
certain rhythm and tonal quality, idea-themes that build,
embellish, and repeat themselves, like the melody of a sonata;
in each mind, too, there are deeper harmonies and dissonances,
and it is their joy to sing to the souls of any who would
listen. Danlo, of course, understood nothing of evolution.
Some part of him, however – the deep, listening part – knew
that Old Father's music was making him sick inside. He clasped
his hands over his navel, suddenly nauseous. The nausea wormed
its way into his mind, and he began to worry that his brief,
narrow understanding of the Unreal City was somehow distorted
or false. With his fist, he kneaded his belly and said, 'Ever
since I awoke in my bed, I have wondered ... many things. Most
of all, I have wondered why no one prays for the spirits of
the dead animals.'
'No one prays, that is so.'
'Because they do not know any better!'
'Praying for the animals is your truth, Danlo.'
   'Do you imply that the truth of the Prayer for the Dead is
not wholly true?'
 'Aha, the truth – you're almost ready for it,' Old Father
said as he began to sing. 'Different peoples, different
truths.'
 'But what truth could an insane people possibly possess ...
that they would not know the names of the animals or pray for
them on their journey to the other side of day?'
   Even though Danlo's voice trembled and he had to swallow
back hot stomach juices to keep from retching, even though a
part of his interior world was crumbling like
90
malku beneath a heavy boot, he was prepared to learn something
fantastic, some horrible new truth or way of thinking. What
this new truth might be, however, was impossible to imagine.
 'Danlo,' Old Father said, 'the meat you've eaten in my house
is not the meat of animals.'
'What!'
 'In nutrient baths, cells are programmed to grow, to
replicate, to– '
'What!'
'Ahhh, this is difficult to explain.'
   Both of Old Father's eyes were now open, twin pools of
golden fire burning with fulfilment and glee. He delighted in
causing Danlo psychic anguish. He was a Fravashi, and not for
nothing are the Fravashi known as the 'holy sadists'. Truth
from pain – this is a common Fravashi saying. Old Father loved
nothing better than to inflict the angslan, the holy pain, the
pain that comes from higher understanding.
 'The meats of the Civilized Worlds are cultured almost like
crystals, grown layer upon layer in a salt water bath.'
'I do not understand.'
   'Imagine: independent, floating tissues, huge pink sheets of
meat growing, growing. Ah ho, the meats are really more like
plants than animal. So it's so: no bone, no nerves, no
connection to the brain of a living animal. Just meat. No
animal has to die to provide this meat.'
 The idea of eating meat that wasn't really meat made Danlo
sick. He rubbed his aching neck; he coughed and swallowed back
his vomit. How could he pray for the spirits of the dead
animals, he wondered, when no animals had died to provide his
meat? Had this meat ever possessed true spirit, true life? He
grabbed his stomach and moaned. Perhaps his thinking truly was
bound by old ideas; perhaps, as Old Father might say, he was
glavering and was too blinded by his familiar thoughtways to
see things clearly. But if that were so, he asked himself, how
could
91
he know anything? Like a traveller lost in the enclosing
whiteness of a morateth, he searched for some familiar custom,
some memory or piece of knowledge by which he might steer his
thinking. He remembered that the women of his tribe, after they
had finished panting and pushing out their newborn babies,
boiled and ate the bloody afterbirths which their heaving wombs
expelled. (In truth, he was not supposed to know this because
it was the women's secret knowledge. But once, when he was nine
years old, he had sneaked deep into the cave where the men were
forbidden to go, and he had watched awestruck as his
near-mother, Sanya, gave birth.) No prayers were said when this
piece of human meat was eaten. No one could think that an
afterbirth might have a spirit to be prayed for. He tried to
think of the civilized meats as afterbirths, but he could not.
The meats of the City had never been pan of a living animal!
How could he forswear hunting to eat such meat? It would
dishonour the animals, he thought, if he refused to hunt them
and partake of their life. Something must be wrong with people
who grew meat even as the sun ripens berries or snow apples or
other plants. Something was terribly wrong. Surely it must be
shaida to eat meat which had never been alive.
   'Oh, Danlo, you must remember, many men and women of the
City live by the rule of ahimsa: never killing or hurting any
animal, never, never. It is better to die oneself than to
kill.'
   Suddenly, the mint tea, the thousand unknown objects of the
thinking chamber, Old Father's piney body stench and his
relentless music – all the strange sensa and ideas were too
much for Danlo. His face fell white and grim while juices
spurted in his mouth. He knelt on hands and knees, and he
spewed a bellyful of sour brown meats over the carpet. 'Oh!' he
gasped. 'Oh, no!'
 He looked about for a piece of old leather or something so he
could sop up his mess. According to everything he had been
taught, he should have been ashamed to waste
92
good food, but when he thought of what he had eaten, he gasped
and heaved and vomited again.
 'Aha, ho, I should thank you for decorating this carpet with
the essence of your pain. And my mother would thank you, too –
she wove it from the hair of her body.'
 Danlo looked down at the carpet's beautifully woven black and
white birds, now swimming in his vomit. Birds shouldn't be made
to swim, he thought, and he was desperate to undo what had
happened.
   'Don't concern yourself,' Old Father said gently. 'As I've
explained, Fravashi have no disgust of the body's orifices, or
of what occasionally emerges from them. We'll leave this to
dry, as a reminder.'
   More insanity, Danlo thought, and he suddenly was dying to
flee this insanity, to flee homeward to Kweitkel where his
found-mother would make him bowls of hot blood-tea and sing to
him while she plucked the lice from his hair. He wanted this
journey into insanity to be over: he wanted the world to be
comfortable and make sense again. He knew that he should flee
immediately from the room, yet something kept him kneeling on
the carpet, staring into Old Father's beautiful face.
   'Now it begins,' he said to Danlo, and he smiled. He was the
holiest of holy sadists, but in truth he was also something
else. 'Who'll show a man just as he is? Oh ho, the glavering,
the glavering – try to behold yourself without glavering.'
 Danlo touched the white feather bound to his dishevelled
black and red hair. In his dark blue eyes there was curiosity
and a terrible will in the face of falling madness. He felt
himself becoming lost in uncertainty, into that silent
morateth of the spirit that he had always looked away from
with dread and despair. A sudden chill knowledge came into
him: It was possible that all that he knew was false, or
worse, arbitrary and quaint. Or worse still, unreal. All his
knowledge of the animals and the world, unreal. In this insane
City of Light, it very well might be impossible
93
 to distinguish the real from what was not. At least it might
be impossible for a boy as ignorant and wild as he. He still
believed, though, that there must be a way to see reality's
truth, however much it might rage, white and wild and chaotic
as the worst of blizzards. Somewhere, there must be a higher
truth beyond the truths that his found-father had taught him,
certainly beyond what Old Father and the civilized people of
the City could know. Perhaps beyond even the Song of Life.
Where he would find this truth, he could not say. He knew only
that he must someday look upon the truth of the world, and all
the worlds of the universe, and see it for what it really was.
He would live for truth – this he promised himself. When truth
was finally his, he could come at last to know halla and live
at peace with all things.
   This sudden, revealed direction of his life's journey was
itself a part of the higher truth that he thought of as fate,
and the unlooked-for connectedness between purpose and
possibility delighted him. Inside, chaos was woven into the
very coil of life, but inside, too, was a new delight in the
possibilities of that life. All at once, he felt light and
giddy, drunk with possibility. He was no longer afraid of
madness; in relief (and in reaction to all the absurdities that
had occurred that evening), he began to laugh. The corners of
his eyes broke into tens of radiating, upraised lines, and even
though he gasped and covered his mouth, he couldn't stop
laughing.
   Old Father looked into his eyes, touched his forehead and
intoned, 'Only a madman or a saint could laugh in the face of
this kind of personal annihilation.'
 'But... sir,' Danlo forced out between waves of laughter,
'you said I must look at myself... without glavering, yes?'
   'Ah ho, but I didn't think you would succeed so well. Why
aren't you afraid of yourself, as other men are? As bound to
yourself?'
'I do not know.'
94
 'Did you know that laughing at oneself is the key to escaping
the glavering?'
 Danlo smiled at Old Father and decided to reveal the story of
his birth that Chandra had often repeated. Even though
Three-Fingered Soli had told him that Chandra was not his true
mother, he liked to believe this story because it seemed to
explain so much about himself. Probably, he thought, Chandra
had witnessed his birth and altered the story slightly.
 'They say I was born laughing,' Danlo told Old Father. 'At my
first breath of air, laughing at the cold and the light,
instead of crying. I was not I then, I was just a baby, but the
natural state, the laughing ... if laughter is the sound of my
first self, then when I laugh, I return there and everything is
possible, yes?'
   With one eye closed, Old Father nodded his head painfully.
And then he asked, 'Why did you come to Neverness?'
 'I came to become a pilot,' Danlo said simply. To make a boat
and sail the frozen sea where the stars shine. To find halla.
Only at the centre of the Great Circle will I be able to see
... the truth of the world.'
 Next to Old Father, atop a low, black lacquer table, was a
bowl of shraddha seeds, each of which was brownish-red and as
large as a man's knuckle. Old Father reached out to lift the
bowl onto his lap. He scooped up a handful of seeds and began
eating them one by one.
 'Ah,' he said as he crunched a seed between his large jaws.
'You want to make another journey. And such a dangerous one –
may I tell you the parable of the Unfulfilled Father's journey?
I think you'll enjoy this, oh ho! Are you comfortable? Would
you like a pillow to sit on?'
'No, thank you,' Danlo said.
   'Well, then, ah ... long, long ago, on the island of
Fravashing's greatest ocean, it came time for the Unfulfilled
Father to leave the place of his birth. All Unfulfilled
Fathers, of course, must leave their birth clan and seek the
95
 acceptance of a different one, on another island – else the
clans would become inbred and it would be impossible for the
Fravashi Fathers to learn the wisdom of faraway places. In
preparation for his journey, the Unfulfilled Father began to
gather up all the shraddha seeds on the island. The First Least
Father saw him doing this and took him aside. "Why are you
gathering so many seeds?" he asked. "Don't you know that the
Fravashi won't invent boats for another five million years?
Don't you know that you will have to swim to the island of your
new life? How can you swim with ten thousand pounds of seeds?"
And the Unfulfilled Father replied, "These shraddha seeds are
the only food I know, and I'll need every one of them when I
get to the new island." At this, the First Least Father
whistled at him and said, "Don't you suppose you will find food
on your new island?" And the Unfulfilled Father argued, "But
shraddha seeds grow only on this island, and I will starve
without them." Whereupon the First Least Father laughed and
said, "But what if this turned out to be a parable and your
shraddha seeds were not seeds at all, but rather your basic
beliefs?" The Unfulfilled Father told him, "I don't
understand," and he swam out into the ocean with all his seeds.
There he drowned, and sad to say, he never came within sight of
his new island.'
 Having finished his story, Old Father rather smugly reached
into the bowl and placed a shraddha seed into his mouth. And
then another, and another after that. He ground up and ate the
seeds slowly, though continually, almost without pause. The
cracked seeds gave off a bitter, soapy smell that Danlo found
repulsive. Old Father told him that it was dangerous for human
beings to eat the seeds, which is why he did not offer him any.
He told him other things as well. Subtly, choosing his words
with care, he began to woo Danlo into the difficult way of the
Fravashi philosophy. This was his purpose as a Fravashi Old
Father, to seek new students and free them from the crush-
96
 ing, smothering weight of their belief systems. For a good
part of the evening, he had listened to Danlo speak, listened
for the rhythms, stress syllables, nuances and key words that
would betray his mind's basic prejudices. Each person, of
course, as the Fravashi have long ago discovered, acquires a
unique repertoire of habits, customs, conceits and beliefs;
these conceptual prisons delimit and hold the mind as surely as
quick-freezing ice captures a butterfly. It was Old Father's
talent and calling to find the particular word keys that might
unlock his students' mental prisons. That which is made with
words, with words can be unmade' – this was an old Fravashi
saying, almost as old as their complex and powerful language,
which was very old indeed.
   'Beliefs are the eyelids of the mind,' Old Father told
Danlo. 'How we hold things in our minds is infinitely more
important than what we hold there.'
'How, then, should I hold the truths of the Song of Life?'
'That is for you to decide.'
 'You hint that Ayeye, Gauri and Nunki, all the animals of the
dreamtime – you hint that they are only symbols of
consciousness, yes? The way consciousness inheres in all
things?'
 'So, it's so: it's possible to see the animals as archetypes
or symbols.'
   'But Ahira is my other-self. Truly. When I close my eyes, I
can hear him calling me.'
   Danlo said this with a smile on his lips. Even though he
himself now doubted everything he had ever learned, in the
wisdom of his ancestors he still saw many truths. Because he
was not quite ready to face the universal chaos with a wholly
naked mind (and because he was too strong-willed simply to
replace the Alaloi totem system with Old Father's alien
philosophy), he decided to give up no part of this wisdom
without cause and contemplation. In some way deeper than that
of mere symbol, Ahira was still his other-self; Ahira still
called to him when he listened, called
97
him to journey to the stars where he might at last find halla.
 'So many strange words and strange ideas,' he said.
'Everything that has happened tonight, so strange.'
'Aha.'
'But I must thank you for giving me these strangenesses.'
'You're welcome.'
   'And I must thank you for taking me into your home and
feeding me, although of course I cannot thank you for feeding
me shaida meat.'
   'Oh ho! Again you're welcome – the Alaloi are very polite.'
 Danlo brushed his thick hair away from his eyes and asked,
'Do you know how I might become a pilot and sail from star to
star?'
   Old Father picked up his empty teacup and held it between
his furry hands. To become a pilot you would have to enter the
Order. So, it's so: Neverness, this Unreal City of ours, exists
solely to educate an elite of human beings, to initiate them
into the Order.'
'There is a ... passage into this Order, yes?'
   'A passage, just so. Boys and girls come from many, many
worlds to be pilots. And cetics, programmers, holists and
scryers – you can't yet imagine the varieties of wisdom which
exist. Oh ho, but it's difficult to enter the Order, Danlo. It
might be easier to fill an empty cup with tea merely by wishing
it so.'
   The Fravashi do not like to say a thing is impossible, so he
smiled at Danlo and whistled sadly.
'I must continue my journey,' Danlo said.
 'There are many journeys one can make. All paths lead to the
same place, so the Old Fathers say. If you'd like, you may stay
here and study with the other students.'
 In the thinking chamber, there was no sound other than the
crunching of Old Father's seeds. While they had talked, the
chanting coming from the house's other rooms had faded out and
died.
98
 'Thank you,' Danlo said, and he touched the white feather in
his hair. 'Kareeska, grace beyond grace, you've been so kind,
but I must continue my journey. Is there any way you can help
me?'
 Old Father whistled a while before saying, 'In another age, I
might have invited you into the Order. Now, the Fravashi have
no formal relationship – none! – with the lords and masters who
decide who will become pilots and who will not. Still, I have
friends in the Order. I have friends, and there is the smallest
of chances.'
'Yes?'
   'Every year, at the end of false winter, there is a
competition of sorts. Oh ho, a test! Fifty thousand farsiders
come to Neverness in hope of entering the Order. Perhaps sixty
of them are chosen for the novitiate. The smallest of chances,
Danlo, such a small chance.'
'But you will help me with this test?'
 'I'll help you, only ...' Old Father's eyes were now twin
mirrors reflecting Danlo's courage in the face of blind fate,
his verve and optimism, his rare gift for life. But the
Fravashi are never content merely to reflect all that is
holiest in another. There must always be a place inside for the
angslan, the holy pain. 'I'll help you, only you must always
remember one thing.'
Danlo rubbed his eyes slowly. 'What thing?' he asked.
   'It's not enough to look for the truth, however noble a
journey that might be. Oh ho, the truth, it's never enough,
never, never! If you become a pilot, if you journey to the
centre of the universe and look out on the stars and the secret
truths, if by some miracle you should see the universe for what
it is, that is not enough. You must be able to say "yes" to
what you see. To all truths. No matter the dread or anguish, to
say "yes". What kind of man or woman could say "yes" in the
face of the truth? So, it's so: I teach you the asarya. He is
the yeasayer who could look upon evil, disease and suffering,
all the worst incarnations of the Eternal No, and not fall
insane. He is the
99
great-souled one who can affirm the truth of the universe. Ah,
but by what art, what brilliance, what purity of vision? Oh,
Danlo, who has the will to become an asarya?'
   Old Father began to sing, then, a poignant, rapturous song
that made Danlo brood upon fear and fate. After saying
good-night, Danlo returned to his room, returned down the long
stone hallway to the softness and warmth of his bed, but he
could not sleep. He lay awake playing his shakuhachi, thinking
of everything that had happened in Old Father's chamber. To be
an asarya, to say 'yes' to shaida and halla and the other
truths of life – no other idea had ever excited him so much.
Ahira, Ahira, he silently called, did he, Danlo the Wild, have
the will to become an asarya? All night long he played his
shakuhachi, and in the breathy strangeness of the music, he
thought he could hear the answer, 'yes'.
CHAPTER FOUR

Shih

The metaphysicians of Tlon view time as being the most illusory
of mental constructions. According to one school, the present
is formless and undefined, while the future is just present
hope, and the past is nothing more than present memory in the
minds of men. One school teaches that the universe was created
only moments ago (or that it is being eternally created), and
all sentient creatures remember with perfect clarity a past
that has never been. Still another school has as its
fundamental doctrine that the whole of time has already
occurred and that our lives are but vague memories in the mind
of God.
 – from the Second Encyclopaedia of Tlon, Vol. MXXVI, page 33
 100
 In truth, Danlo really didn't know how difficult it is to
enter the Order. On the planets of the Civilized Worlds, the
Order maintains thousands of elite and lesser schools. The
students of the lesser schools vie with one another to enter
the elite schools; in the elite schools, there is a vicious
struggle to be among the few chosen for the novitiate and the
great Academy on Neverness. And so the chosen come to the City
of Light, where there is always a sense of being at the centre
of things, an immanence of cosmic events and astonishing
revelations. In truth, Neverness is the spiritual centre of the
most brilliant civilization man has ever known. Who would not
desire a lifetime of seeking knowledge and truth in sight of
her silvery spires? Who would not relish the excitement, the
camaraderie, and above all, the sheer power of being a pilot or
high professional of the
101
Order? So esteemed and coveted is this life of the mind (and
since the masters of the various disciplines can be brought
back to their youthful bodies many times, it can be a very long
life indeed) that many ordinary people come to Neverness hoping
to bribe or bully their way into the Order. There is of course
no hope for these venal souls, but for others, for the
thousands of unfortunate girls and boys who grow up on planets
too small or obscure to support an elite school, there is the
slightest of hopes. As Old Father informed Danlo, each year the
masters of the Order hold a competition. And it is not easy to
enter the competition, much less to win a place at Borja, which
is the first of the Academy's schools. Petitions must be made.
Each boy or girl (or in rare cases, each of the double-sexed)
must find a sponsor willing to petition the Master of Novices
at Borja. The sponsors must certify their student's brilliance,
character, and most importantly, their desire to enter the
novitiate. Each year, more than fifty thousand petitions are
received, but only one of seven are accepted. At the end of
false winter, when the sun shines hotly and melts the sea ice,
perhaps seven thousand of the luckiest youths are permitted to
enter this most intense of competitions.
 'Oh ho, I have sponsored you,' Old Father told Danlo a few
days later. 'I've made a petition in your behalf, and we will
see what we will see.'
  While Danlo awaited the doubtful results of Old Father's
petition – doubtful because Bardo the Just, Master of Novices,
was said to resent the Fravashi and any others who taught
outside of the Order's dominion – he busied himself learning
the thousands of skills necessary to negotiate the strange
streets and even stranger ways of the city called Neverness.
During the evenings, Fayeth began the painful task of teaching
him the Language of the Civilized Worlds. And every morning,
when the air was clean and brisk, the black man who had first
dubbed him 'Danlo the Wild' taught him to ice skate. Luister
Ottah, who was as thin and dark (and quick) as a raven, took
Danlo out on the
102
icy streets. He showed him how to stroke with his skates and
hold an even edge; he showed him how to execute a hokkee stop
by jumping in a tight little quarter circle and digging his
steel blades into the ice. Danlo took to this exhilarating
sport immediately. (Although Danlo thought it only natural
that the City streets should be made of ice, the glissades and
slidderies, as they are called, are the wonder – and
consternation – of all who visit Neverness.) He spent long
afternoons racing up and down the streets of the Fravashi
District, savouring the sensations of his new life. The hot
yellow sun, the cool wind, the cascade of scurfed-off ice
whenever he ground to a sudden stop – he loved the touch of
the world. He loved the sting of the soreesh snow that fell
every third or fourth day; he loved the eave swallows who
roosted atop the round houses; he loved their warbling, their
shiny orange bills, even the chalky smell of their spattered
white droppings. These things were real, and he grasped for
the reality of the world as a baby grasps his mother's long,
flowing hair.
  Other things seemed less real. The ecology of the City made
no sense to him at all. Who made his furs and that remarkable
device called a zipper by which he closed and fastened his
parka? Where did his food come from? Old Father had said that
the grains and nuts he ate for his meals grew in factories to
the south of Neverness. Every morning, sleds laden with food
rocketed up and down the streets. Danlo had seen these sleds.
They were not, of course, real sleds pulled by dogs. They were
brightly coloured clary shells mounted on steel runners.
Rhythmic jets of flame and burning air pushed the sleds across
the ice. The sight of these sleek, fiery monsters terrified
him, at least at first. (And he was quite confused by the
harijan men who operated the sleds laden with cast-off
clothing, with broken vases and sulki grids and ruined
furniture, and with pieces of half-eaten food. He couldn't
imagine why anyone would wish to accomplish such labour. Old
Father explained this puzzle with typical Fravashi humour.
 103
 He said that human beings had invented civilization in order
to develop a class of people low enough to handle other
people's rubbish.) After a while, Danlo's terror softened to
wonder, and wonder became profound doubt: what if the sleds
turned against their human masters and refused to bear their
loads? Or what if a storm, a vicious sarsara, destroyed the
factories, whatever factories really were? How would the city
people eat? There could not be enough animals in the world to
feed so many people – would they eat each other? Was it
possible they didn't know it was shaida for human beings to
hunt one another?
  Because Danlo would not eat the factories' cultured meats
but still had a taste for shagshay or silk belly or fish,
sometimes he would cross to the district's edge and steal into
the woods of the City Wild. And he hunted. There, among the
flowing streams and yu trees, he found a small herd of
shagshay. With their fuzzy false winter antlers and their dark,
trusting eyes, they were not quite civilized, but neither were
they completely wild. It was too easy to kill them. He stripped
the bark from a limb of black shatterwood, carved it, and
mounted the long flint spearpoint that he had secreted inside
his furs. (His old spear shaft he had to leave at Old Father's
house because it was illegal to carry weapons through the
City.) On two different days he killed two fawns and ten
sleekits before deciding that there weren't enough animals in
the City Wild for him to hunt. He froze part of the meat and
ate the shagshay's tenderloin raw. He did not want to build a
fire. Too many paths wound through the woods; too many people
from the surrounding districts took their exercise skating
there. It was not illegal to hunt animals within the City, but
Danlo didn't know this. There was no law against hunting or
cutting trees only because no one had ever thought that such a
law would be necessary. He sensed, however, that the insane
people would be disgusted by his killing animals for food, much
as he dreaded the thought of eating shaida meat that wasn't
real. In the end, after many days of sur-
 104
 reptitious feasting in the yu trees, he decided that he would
eat neither cultured meats nor animals. He would follow Old
Father's example. Grains, nuts, pulses, and fruit – henceforth
these kinds of plant life would be his only food.
 Perhaps the most unreal thing about his new life were the
people of the City themselves. With their many-coloured skins
and differently shaped noses, lips, and brows, they looked much
like demons out of a nightmare, and he often wondered if they
had real spirits as real people do. He passed them every day on
the streets, and he wondered at their peculiar stiffness and
weakness of limb. They seemed so hurried and aloof, and
abstract, as if their thoughts were as insubstantial as smoke.
Could it be that they weren't really there at all, not really
living in the moment? Their faces were so ugly with wants and
fears and urgency, so very ugly and hard to read. What must
they think of him, with his white feather and his wind-whipped
hair? In truth, no one bothered to notice him at all. It was as
if they couldn't see him, couldn't perceive his curiosity, his
loneliness, and his uncivilized spirit. Usually, he was dressed
much as an Alaloi (in new, white furs that Old Father had given
him), but so were many other people. And many were dressed much
more colourfully. Autists, neurosingers, cetics, harijan and
whores – people of many different sects and professions every
day passed through the district. And the clothes they wore! Red
robes, emerald sweaters and furs of every colour. Journeymen
holists skated by in cobalt kamelaikas. He saw jewelled, satin
jackets, cottons and woollens, and kimonos woven of a material
called silk. Much of this clothing was beautiful, in a gaudy,
overwhelming way. It was hard to continually take in such
beauty. After a while, he tired of looking at fabricated
things; he felt sick and too full, as if he had eaten eight
bowls of overripe yu berries. He invented a word for the
different beauties of the City: shona-manse, the beauty that
man makes with his hands. It was not a deep beauty. Nor was it
a various beauty, despite the many
 105
 hues and textures of manmade things. In a single chunk of
granite, with its millions of pink and black flecks of quartz,
mica and silicates, there was more complexity and variety than
in the loveliest kimono. It was true that most of the buildings
– the glory of Neverness! – were faced with granite, basalt,
and other natural rocks. When Danlo looked eastward toward the
Old City, the obsidian spires glittered silver-black. And, yes,
it was beautiful, but it was a dazzling, too-perfect beauty. No
single spire possessed a mountain's undulations or its
intricate and subtle pattern of trees, rock, snow and ice. And
the City itself was ill-balanced and unalive compared to the
beauty of the world. Where, in such an unreal place, could he
hope to find halla? A few times, at night, he sneaked out of
Old Father's house to gaze at the stars. But everywhere he
looked the city spires were outlined black against the sky. He
could see only the supernovae, Nonablinka and Shurablinka, and
the enigmatic Golden Flower; the hideous glowing haze of a
million city lights devoured the other stars. Oh, blessed , he
thought, why must the people of the City place so many things
between themselves and the world?
 Once, he asked Old Father about this, and Old Father stroked
his furry white face in imitation of a man thinking, and he
said, 'Oh ho, soon enough you will learn about the Fifth
Mentality and the Age of Simulation, but for now it's
sufficient to appreciate one thing: Every race that has evolved
language is cursed – and blessed! – with this problem of
filtering reality. You say that the people of Neverness are cut
off from life, but you haven't journeyed to Tria, where the
tubists and merchants spend almost their entire lives inside
plastic boxes breathing conditioned air and facing sense boxes.
And what of the made-worlds orbiting Cipriana Luz? Aha, and
what of the Alaloi? Do they not place animal furs between their
skins and the coldness of ice? Oh ho! I suppose you can tell me
that your Alaloi don't have a language?'
Danlo, as a guest of an Honoured Fravashi, was begin-
106
ning to appreciate how words can shape reality. He said, The
Alaloi have a language, yes. On the second morning of the
world, the god Kweitkel kissed the frozen lips of Yelena and
Manwe and the other children of Devaki. He kissed their lips to
give them the gift of Song. The true Song is perfectly created
so the sons and daughters of the world can know reality.
Perfect words as pure and clean as soreesh snow. Not like these
confusing words of the civilized language that Fayeth has been
teaching me.'
 'Oh ho!' Old Father said. 'You're glavering again, and you
must be as wary of the glavering as a shagshay ewe is of a
wolf. In time you'll appreciate the beauty and subtlety of this
language. Oh ah, there are many concepts and ways of seeing. So
many realities beyond the immediacy of soreesh or the sarsara
that blows and freezes the flesh. Beyond even what you call the
altjiranga mitjina.'
'You know about the dreamtime of my people?'
  'Ah, I do know about the dreamtime – I'm a Fravashi, am I
not? The dreamtime occupies a certain space similar to the
space of samadhi. There are many, many spaces, of course. Do
you want to learn the words?'
 'But I'm already too full of words. Last night, Fayeth taught
me three new words for ways of seeing the truth.'
'And what were these words?'
  Danlo closed his eyes, remembering. There is hanura and
nornura. And there is inura, too.'
'And what is inura?'
 'Fayeth defines it as the superposition of two or more
conflicting theories, ideas or sets of knowledge in order to
see the intersection, which is called the comparative truth.'
  'Oh ho! Even seemingly opposite truths may have something in
common. So, inura: you should keep this word close to your
tongue, Danlo.'
  Danlo ran his fingers through his hair and said, 'Different
words for truth, but the truth is the truth, isn't it? Why
slice truth into thin sections like a woman slices up a piece
107
 of shagshay liver? And space is ... just space; now you say
there are different spaces?'
  'So, it's so: thoughtspace and dreamspace, realspace, and
the many spaces of the computers; there is memory space and
the ontic realm of pure mathematics, and of course the
strangest space of all, the space that the pilots call the
manifold. So many spaces, oh, so many realities.'
  Danlo could not deny that the people of the City lived in a
different reality from his. The spaces that their minds dwelt
in – so different, so strange! He wondered if he could ever
learn the language of such a strange people. In truth, he
balked at learning their strange nouns and verbs because he
was worried that the words of an insane people would infect
him with that very insanity.
  'Ah, oh, it's just so,' Old Father said. 'It's too bad that
you can't learn the Fravashi language – then you would know
what is sane and what is not.'
 If it was true that Danlo, like other human beings, could not
master the impossible Fravashi language, at least he could
learn their system toward a sane and liberated way of being.
After all, the Fravashi had taught this system across the
Civilized Worlds for three thousand years. Some consider
Fravism, as it is sometimes called, to be an old philosophy or
even a religion, but in fact it was designed to be both
anti-philosophy and anti-religion. Unlike Zanshin, Buddhism, or
the Way of the Star, pure Fravism does not in itself try to
lead its practitioners toward enlightenment, awakening, or
rapture with God. What the first Old Fathers sought – and some
still seek – is just freedom. Specifically, it is their purpose
to free men and women from the various cultures, languages,
worldviews, cults and religions that have enslaved human beings
for untold years. The Fravashi system is a way of learning how
one's individual beliefs and worldviews are imprinted during
childhood. Or rather, it is an orchestration of techniques
designed to help one unlearn the many flawed and unwholesome
ways of seeing the world that human beings have evolved. Many
108
 religions, of course, out of their injunction to find new
adherents, deprogram the minds of those whom they would
convert. They do this through the use of isolation, paradox,
psychic shock, even drugs and sex – and then they reprogram
these very minds, replacing old doctrines and beliefs with ones
that are new. The Fravashi Old Fathers, however, have no wish
to instil in their students just a new set of beliefs. What
they attempt to catalyze is a total transformation in
perception, in the way the eye, ear, and brain reach out to
organize the chaos and reality of the world. In truth, they
seek the evolution of new senses.
  'So, it's so,' Old Father said, 'after a million years,
human beings are still so human: listening, they do not hear;
they have eyes but they don't really see. Oh ho, and worse,
worst of all, they have brains with which to think, and
thinking – and thinking and thinking – they still do not know.'
  In Old Father's encounters with his students, he often
warned against what he considered the fundamental philosophical
mistake of man: the perception of the world as divided into
individual and separate things. Reality, he said, at every
level from photons to philosophical fancies to the
consciousness of living organisms was fluid, and it flowed
everywhere like a great shimmering river. To break apart and
confine this reality into separate categories created by the
mind was foolish and futile, much like trying to capture a ray
of light inside a dark wooden box. This urge to categorize was
the true fall of man, for once the process was begun, there was
no easy or natural return to sanity. All too inevitably, the
infinite became finite, good opposed evil, thoughts hardened
into beliefs, one's joys and discoveries became dreadful
certainties, man became alienated from what he perceived as
other ways and other things, and, ultimately, divided against
himself, body and soul. According to the Fravashi, the
misapprehension of the real world is the source of all
suffering; it is bondage
109
to illusion, and it causes human beings to grasp and hold onto
life, not as it is, but as they wish it to be. Always seeking
meaning, always seeking to make their lives safe and
comprehensible, human beings do not truly live. This is the
anguish of man which the Fravashi would alleviate.
 The Fravashi use their word keys and songs and alien logic to
bring human beings closer to themselves, but the first part of
this program toward liberation is the teaching of the language
called Moksha. As Danlo became more familiar with the ways of
Old Father's house, he immersed himself in the Fravashi system
with all the passion of a seal splashing in the ocean, only to
discover that he was required to learn the strange words and
forms of Moksha.
 'But, sir, the Language is confusing enough,' Danlo told Old
Father. 'Now you say that I must learn Moksha, too – and at
the same time?'
 'Ha, ha, you are confused, just so, but the Old Fathers made
Moksha solely to free human beings from their confusion,' Old
Father said. 'Learn and learn, and you will see what you see.'
 Where the Fravashi system, as a whole, was created to free
people from all systems, Moksha was put together as a kind of
mind shield against the great whining babble of all human
languages. It is a synthetic language, rich with invented words
for strange and alien concepts, and with thousands of borrowed
words from Sanskrit, Anglish, Old Japanese and, of course, from
the various languages of Tlon. The Fravashi Fathers regard this
language family as the most sublime of all Old Earth's
languages; from the Tlonish grammar, they have borrowed
elements of syntax that accommodate and support the pellucid
Fravashi worldview. Some say that Moksha is as complex and
difficult to learn as the Fravashi language itself, but a
clever woman or man is usually able to master it once a few
familiar notions are discarded. For instance, Moksha contains
no verb for the concept 'to be', in the sense that one thing
can be something else. As the Fravashi say: 'Every-
110
thing is, but nothing is anything'. In Moksha, the sentence 'I
am a pilot' would be an impossible construction. As Danlo
learned, one might try to say: 'I act like a pilot', of, 'I
have learned a pilot's skills' or even, 'I exult in the
perquisites and glory of a pilot', but one could never
proclaim, 'I am this' or, 'I am that', any more than one would
say, 'I am a bowl of noodles'.
  At first this aspect of Moksha confused Danlo, for he
thought that the path toward sanity lay in seeing the
connectedness of all things. He was familiar with the Sanskrit
equation: Tat tvam asi, that thou art. In some sense, he really
was a bowl of noodles, or rather, his true essence and that of
noodles (or falling snow or stone or a bird with white
feathers) was one and the same. Because he thought these
Sanskrit words were pure wisdom, he went to Old Father to ask
why Moksha forbade such expressions.
 'Ah, ah,' Old Father said, 'but the problem is not with
Moksha, but with the natural human languages. Oh, even with the
Sanskrit. Does Sanskrit have a word for "you"? Yes. A word for
"I"? Indeed it does, and sadly so. And so. And so, having such
words, such poisonous concepts, they are forced into paradox to
detoxify and break down these concepts. Tat tvam asi – a deep
statement, no? That thou art. Lovely, succinct, and profound –
but an unnecessary way of expressing a universal truth. Is
there a better way? Oh, ho, I teach you Moksha. If you will
learn this glorious tongue, then you will learn truth not just
in one immortal statement, but in every sentence you speak.'
 And so Danlo applied himself to learning Moksha, and he soon
discovered another reason why it was impossible to simply say,
'I am a pilot'. Moksha, it seemed, had completely freed itself
of the bondage of pronouns, particularly from the most
poisonous pronoun of all.
  'Why do you think Moksha has banished this word "I"?' Old
Father asked one day. 'What is this "I" that human beings are
so attached to? It's pure romance, the greatest of fictions and
confabulations. Can you hold it or taste it?
111
 Can you define it or even see it? "What am I?" asks a man. Oh,
ho, a better question might be, "What am I not?" How often have
you heard someone say, "I'm not myself today?" Or, "I didn't
mean to say that?" No? Ha, ha, here I am dancing, dancing – am
I the movement and genius of my whole organism or merely the
sense of selfness that occupies the body, like a beggar in a
grand hotel room? Am I only the part of myself that is noble,
kind, mindful and strong? Which disapproves and disavows the
"me" that is lustful, selfish, and wild? Who am I? Ah, ah, "I
am" says the man. I am despairing, I am wild, I do not accept
that I am desperate and wild. Who does not accept these things?
I am a boy, I am a man, I am father, hunter, hero, lover,
coward, pilot, asarya and fool. Which "I" are you – Danlo the
Wild? Where is your "I" that changes from mood to mood, from
childhood to old age? Is there more to this "I" than continuity
of memory and love of eating what you call nose ice? Does it
vanish when you fall asleep? Does it multiply by two during
sexual bliss? Does it die when you die – or multiply
infinitely? How will you ever know? So, it's so, you will try
to watch out for yourself lest you lose your selfness. "But how
do I watch?" you ask. Aha – if I am watching myself, what is
the "I" that watches the watcher? Can the eye see itself? Then
how can the "I" see itself? Peel away the skin of an onion and
you will find only more skins. Go look for your "I". Who will
look? You will look. Oh, ho, Danlo, but who will look for you?'
  As Danlo came to appreciate, not only had Moksha done away
with pronouns, but with the class of nouns in general. The
Fravashi loathe nouns as human beings do disease. Nouns,
according to Old Father, are like linguistic iceboxes that
freeze a flowing, liquid reality. In using nouns to designate
and delimit all the aspects of the world, it is all too easy to
confuse a symbol for the reality that it represents. This is
the second great philosophical mistake, which the Fravashi
refer to as the 'little maya'. When
112
speaking Moksha, it is difficult to make this mistake, for the
function of nouns has largely been replaced by process verbs,
as well as by the temporary and flexible juxtaposition of
adjectives. For instance, the expression for star might be
'bright-white-continuing', while one might think of a supernova
as 'radiant-splendid-dying'. There is no rule specifying the
choice or number of these adjectives; indeed, one can form
incredibly long and precise (and beautiful) concepts by skilful
agglutination, sticking adjectives one after another like beads
on a string. Aficionados of Moksha, in their descriptions of
the world, are limited only by their powers of perception and
poetic virtue. It is said that one of the first Old Fathers in
Neverness, as an exercise, once invented ten thousand words for
the common snow apple. But one does not need the Fravashi flair
with words to speak Moksha well. By the beginning of winter,
when the first of that season's light snows dusted the streets,
Danlo had learned enough of this language to make such simple
statements as: Chena bokageladesanga faras, which would mean
something like: Now this bright-wild-becoming pilots. Given
enough time in Old Father's house – and given Danlo's
phenomenal memory – he might have become a master of Moksha
rather than a pilot. But even as he composed poems to the
animals and amused Old Father with his attempts to describe the
Alaloi dreamtime, his brilliant fate was approaching, swiftly,
inevitably, like the light of an exploding star.
  On the ninety-third day of winter, after Danlo had begun to
think in Moksha – and after he had put on pounds of new muscle
and burned his face brown in the bright sun – Old Father called
him into his chamber. He informed him that his petition had
been accepted after all. 'I have good news for you,' Old Father
said. 'Bardo the Just does not like Fravashi, but other masters
and lords do. Oh ho, Nikolos Petrosian, the Lord Akashic, is in
love with the Fravashi. He's my friend. And he has persuaded
Master
113
 Bardo to accept my petition. A favour to me, a favour to
you.'
  Danlo understood nothing of politics or trading favours, and
he said, 'I would like to meet Lord Nikolos – he must be a
kind man.'
  'Ah, but someday – if you survive the competition – you may
be required to do more than merely acknowledge his kindness.
For the time, though, it's enough that you compete with the
other petitioners. And if you are to compete with any hope of
winning, I'm afraid that you must learn the Language.'
'But I am learning it, sir.'
 'Yes,' Old Father said, 'you spend ten hours each day making
up songs in Moksha, while you give Fayeth half an hour in the
evening toward your study of the Language.'
  'But the Language is so ugly,' Danlo said. 'So ... clumsy.'
 'Aha, but few in the Order speak Moksha any more. It's almost
a dead art. In the Academy's halls and towers, there is only
the Language.'
 Danlo touched the feather in his hair and said, 'Fayeth
believes that in another year I shall be fluent.'
  'But you don't have another year. The competition begins on
the 20th of false winter.'
'Well,' Danlo said, 'that's more than a half year away.'
  'Aha, very true. But you'll need more than the Language to
enter the Academy. The Language is only a door to other
knowledge, Danlo.'
'And you think I should open this door now, yes?'
  'Oh ho, surely it's upon you to decide this. If you'd like,
we could withdraw the petition and wait until the following
year.'
 'No,' Danlo said. About most things, he had the patience of
an Alaloi, which is to say, the patience of a rock, but
whenever he thought of the journey he had to complete, he was
overcome with a sense of urgency. 'I can't wait that long.'
114
'There is another possibility.'
'Yes?'
 'So, it's so: a language – any human language – can be
learned almost overnight. There are techniques, ways of
directly imprinting the brain with language.'
 Danlo knew that the fount of intelligence lay inside the
head, in the pineal gland which he called the third eye. Brains
were a kind of pink fat which merely insulated this gland from
the cold. Brains – animal brains, that is – were mainly good
for eating or mashing up with wood ash in order to cure raw
furs. 'How can coils of fat hold language?' he wanted to know.
 Old Father whistled a few low notes and then delivered a
short lecture about the structures of the human brain. He
pressed his long fingers down against Danlo's skull, roughly
indicating the location deep in his brain of the hippocampus
and almond-shaped amygdala, which mediated memory and the other
mental functions. 'Like a baldo nut, your brain is divided into
two hemispheres, right and left. Oh ho, two halves – it's as if
you had two brains. Why do you think human beings are divided
against themselves, one half saying "no", while the other half
continually whispers, "yes"?'
  Danlo rubbed his eyes. From time to time, he tired of Old
Father's air of superiority. He had stayed long enough in Old
Father's house to relish the art of sarcasm, so he said, 'And
the Fravashi have an undivided brain? Is this why your
consciousness wriggles about like a speared fatfish and never
holds still?'
 Old Father smiled nicely. 'You're perceptive,' he said. The
Fravashi brain, aha! So, it's so: our brains are divided into
quarters. The frontal lobes,' and here he touched his head
above his golden eyes and whistled softly, 'the front brain is
given over almost wholly to language and the composition of the
songlines. The other parts, other functions. Four quarters: and
the Fravashi sleep by quarters, you should know. Because we
think more, because we are
115
 better able to compose, edit and sing the song of ourselves,
so we sleep more, much more. So, to dream. The Fravashi sleep
by quarters: at any time, one, two or three quarters of our
brain are sleeping. Rarely are we wholly awake. And never –
never, never, never, never! – must we allow ourselves to be
four quarters asleep.'
 It was hard for Danlo to imagine such a consciousness, and he
shook his head. He smiled at Old Father. Then your brain, the
four quarters – does it whisper "yes", "no", "maybe" and
"maybe not"?'
  'Ho, ho, a human being making jokes about the Fravashi
brain!'
  Danlo laughed along with Old Father before falling serious.
He asked, 'Does your brain hold language like mine?'
  'Ah, oh, it would be better to think of the Fravashi brain
absorbing language like cotton cloth sucks up water. There are
deep structures, universal grammars for words, music or any
sound – we hear a language one time, and we cannot forget.'
'But I am a man, and I can forget, yes?'
 'Oh ho, and that's why you must undergo an imprinting, if you
are to learn the Language quickly and completely.'
 Danlo thought of all the things he had learned quickly and
completely during the night of his initiation. He asked, 'Will
it hurt very much?'
 Old Father smiled his sadistic smile, then, and his eyes were
like golden mirrors. 'Ah, the pain. The brain, the pain, the
brain. On your outings with Ottah, skating on the streets, have
you ever seen a Jacaradan [sic; not Jacarandan – reb] whore?'
  Danlo, who would have been shocked that certain women trade
sex for money, that is, if he had known about money, said, 'I
am not sure.'
 'Women who leave their bellies bare, the better to display
their tattoos. Tattoos: red and purple pictures of naked women,
green and blue advertisements of their trade.'
 'Oh, those women.' Danlo had come to appreciate the
subtleties and delicateness of civilized females, and he said,
116
'They are very lovely, yes? – I wondered what they were
called.'
  Old Father whistled a little tune indicating his disapproval
of whores. But the meaning was lost on Danlo. 'An imprinting is
like a tattoo of the brain. Indelible sounds and pictures fixed
into the synapses – the brain's synapses themselves are fixed
like strands of silk in ice. There is no physical pain because
the brain has no nerves. Ah, but the pain! Sudden new concepts,
reference points, relationships among words – you can't imagine
the possible associations. Oh ho, there is pain!, the angslan
of suddenly being more than you were. The pain of knowing. Oh,
the pain, the pain, the pain, the pain.'
  The next day, Old Father took Danlo to the imprimatur's
shop. They left the district via the infamous Fravashi
sliddery, a long orange street which flows down past the Street
of the Common Whores and the Street of Smugglers, and winds
deep into the heart of the Farsider's Quarter. Old Father was
fairly clumsy on his skates. His hips were not as loosely
jointed as a human's, and they creaked with disease. Often,
when rounding a curve he had to lean on Danlo to keep from
falling. Often, he had to stop to catch his breath. They made a
strange pair: Danlo with his open face and deeply curious eyes,
and kindly, inscrutable Old Father towering over him like a
furry mountain. Because it was warm, Danlo wore only a white
cotton shirt, wool trousers and a black wool jacket. (And, of
course, Ahira's white feather fluttering in his hair.) It was
one of those perfect winter days. The sky was as deep blue as a
thallow's eggshell, and a fresh salt wind was blowing off the
ocean. On either side of the street, the outdoor restaurants
and cafes were crowded with people watching the continuous
promenade of people stream by. And there was much to watch. As
they penetrated deeper into the Quarter, the mix of people
began to change and grow ever more colourful, seedier, more
dangerous. There were many more whores and many master
courtesans dressed in diamonds and the
117
 finest of real silks. There were hibakusha in rags, barefoot
autists, harijan, tubists, merchants, wormrunners, and even a
few ronin warrior-poets who had deserted their order for the
pleasures of Neverness. The air heaved with the sounds and
smells of teeming humanity. Fresh bread, sausages and roasted
coffee, ozone, woodsmoke, toalache, wet wool and floral
perfumes, kana oil and sweat, and the faint, ferny essence of
sex – there was no end to the smells of the City. These smells
excited Danlo, although it was difficult to sort one from the
other to track its source. Once, when they were caught in the
crush at the intersection of the Street of Imprimaturs, a plump
little whore pressed up against him and ran her fingers through
his hair. 'Such thick, pretty hair,' she said. 'All black and
red – is it real? I've never seen such hair before.' While Old
Father whistled furiously to shoo her away, Danlo drank in the
fragrance of rose perfume which her sweaty hand had left in his
hair. He had never encountered such a flower before, and he
relished the smell, even though he wished that the whore had
noticed he was not a boy, but a man.
  Of the many shops on the Street of Imprimaturs, Drisana
Lian's was one of the smallest. It sat on the middle of the
block squeezed between a noisy cafe and the fabulously
decorated shop of Baghaim the Imprimatur. Where Baghaim's shop
was large and fronted with stained-glass windows, Drisana's was
nothing more than a hole through an unobtrusive granite
doorway; where many rich and fashionably dressed people queued
up to apply for the services of Baghaim and his assistants,
Drisana's shop was very often empty. 'Drisana is not popular,'
Old Father explained as he knocked at the iron door. That's
because she refuses most imprintings requested of her. Ah, but
there isn't a better imprimatur in the City.'
 The door opened and Drisana greeted Old Father and Danlo. She
bowed painfully but politely and invited them inside. Without
ignoring Danlo, she made it clear she was glad to see Old
Father, whom she had known since he
118
first came to Neverness. They spoke to each other in the
Language, and Danlo was able to pick out only a tenth of the
words. 'Drisana Lian,' Old Father said, 'may I present Danlo.'
'Just "Danlo"?'
'He's called Danlo the Wild.'
 They proceeded slowly down the bare hallway, very slowly
because Drisana was very old and very slow. She shuffled along
in her brownish-grey robe, taking her time. Like Old Father,
she disdained bodily rejuvenations. Danlo had never – at least
in his many days in the City – seen such an old woman. Her hair
was long and grey and tied back in a chignon. Hundreds of deep
lines split her face, which was yellow-white like old ivory.
Most people would have thought her ugly, but Danlo did not. He
thought she was beautiful. She had her own face, as the Devaki
say. He liked her tiny round nose, red as a yu berry. He liked
her straight, white teeth, although it puzzled him that she
still had teeth. All the women of his tribe, long before they
grew as old as Drisana, had worn their teeth down to brown
stumps chewing on skins to soften them for clothing. Most of
all, he liked her eyes. Her eyes were dark brown, at once hard
and soft; her eyes hinted of a tough will and love of life.
Something about her face and her eyes made Danlo feel
comfortable for the first time since he had left his home.
 She led them into a windowless room where Danlo and Old
Father sat on bare wooden chairs around a bare wooden table.
'Mint tea for the Honoured Fravashi?' she asked as she hovered
over her lacquered tea cabinet next to the dark wall. 'And for
the boy, what would he like in his cup? He's not old enough to
drink wine, I don't think.'
  She served them two cups of mint tea, then returned to the
cabinet where she opened a shiny black door and removed a
crystal decanter. She poured herself a half glass of wine.
'It's said that alcohol makes the Fravashi crazy. Now that
would be a sight, wouldn't it – a crazy Fravashi?'
119
'Oh ho! It would be quite a sight indeed.'
  Drisana eased herself into a chair and asked, 'I suppose
Danlo is here for an imprinting? A language, of course.' She
turned to Danlo and said, 'Old Father always brings his
students to me to learn a language. What will it be? Anglish?
Old Swahili? New Japanese? The Sanskrit, or the
neurologician's sign language they employ on Silvaplana? I'm
sure you'd like to learn the abominably difficult Fravashi
language but that's impossible. No one can imprint it. Eighty
years I've been trying and all I can manage is a few
whistles.'
 Danlo was silent because he didn't understand her. He tapped
his forehead and smiled.
  Drisana wet her lips with wine and whistled at Old Father.
In truth, she could speak more than a few whistles of Fravash,
enough to make her meaning understood: 'What is the matter
with this boy?'
  Old Father loved speaking his own language and he smiled. He
whistled back, 'So, it's so: he needs to learn the Language.'
  'What? But everyone speaks the Language! Everyone of the
Civilized Worlds.'
'So, it's so.'
  'He's not civilized, then? Is that why you call him "Danlo
the Wild"?' Such a name – I certainly don't approve of these
kinds of names, the poor boy. But he's not of the Japanese
Worlds, certainly. And he doesn't seem as if he's been carked.'
  In truth, one of Danlo's ancestors had illegally carked the
family chromosomes, hence his unique, hereditary black and red
hair. But it was too dark in the room for Drisana to make out
the spray of red in his hair; it was too dark and her eyes were
too old and weak. She must have seen clearly enough, however,
that he possessed none of the grosser bodily deformations of
the fully carked races: blue skin, an extra thumb, feathers,
fur or the ability to breathe water instead of air.
120
  'Ah oh, I can't tell you where he comes from,' Old Father
whistled.
'It's a secret? I love secrets, you know.'
'It's not for me to tell you.'
  'Well, the Fravashi are famous for their secrets, it's
said.' Drisana drank her wine and got up to pour herself
another glass. To imprint the Language – nothing could be
easier. It's so easy, I hesitate to ask for payment.'
  Old Father closed one eye and slowly whistled, 'I was hoping
to make the usual payment.'
'I'd like that,' Drisana told him.
 The usual payment was a song drug. Old Father agreed to sing
for Drisana after their business was concluded. The Fravashi
have the sweetest, most exquisite of voices, and to humans,
their otherworldly songs are as intoxicating as any drug.
Neither of them approved of money, and they disdained its use.
Old Father, of course, as a Fravashi believed that money was
silly. And Drisana, while she had defected from the Order years
ago, still clung to most of her old values. Money was evil, and
young minds must be nurtured, no matter the cost. She loved
bestowing new languages on the young, but she refused to
imprint wolf consciousness onto a man, or transform a shy girl
into a libertine, or perform the thousand other personality
alterations and memory changes so popular among the bored and
desperate. And so, her shop usually remained empty.
 Drisana poured herself a third glass of wine, this time from
a different decanter. Danlo smiled and watched her take a sip.
 'It's rude,' she whistled to Old Father, 'how very rude it is
to speak in front of him in a language he doesn't understand.
In a language no one understands. When we begin the
imprinting, I shall have to speak to him. I suppose you'll
have to translate. You do speak the boy's language, don't
you?' Old Father, who was not permitted to lie, said, 'It's
so.
121
 Of course I do. Oh ho, but if I translate, you might
recognize the language and thus determine his origins.'
 Drisana stood near Danlo and rested her hand on his shoulder.
Beneath the loose skin on the back of her hand, the veins
twisted like thin, blue worms. 'Such a secret you're making of
him! If you need to keep your secret, of course you must keep
it. But I won't make an imprinting unless I can talk to him.'
'Perhaps you could speak to him in Moksha.'
'Oh? Is he fluent?'
'Nearly so.'
'I'm afraid that won't be sufficient, then.'
 Old Father closed both eyes for an uncomfortably long time.
He stopped whistling and started to hum. At last he looked at
Danlo and said, 'Lo ti dirasa, ah ha, I must tell you Drisana's
words as she speaks them.'
'He speaks Alaloi!' Drisana said.
'You recognize the language?'
  'How could I not?' Drisana, who spoke five hundred and
twenty-three languages, was suddenly excited, so excited that
she neglected to transpose her words into the Alaloi tongue.
She began talking about the most important event that had
happened in the Order since Neverness was founded. 'It's been
four years since Mallory Ringess ascended to heaven, or
whatever it is that his followers believe. I think the Lord
Pilot left the City on another journey – the universe is
immense, is it not? Who can say if he'll ever return? Well,
everyone is saying he became a god and will never return. One
thing is certainly known: the Ringess once imprinted Alaloi –
he was a student of bizarre and ancient languages. And now it
seems that everyone wants to do the same, as young Danlo has
obviously done. It's really worship, you know. Emulation, the
power of apotheosis. As if learning a particular language could
bring one closer to the godhead.'
  Old Father was obliged to translate this, and he did so.
However, he seemed to be having trouble speaking.
122
Alternately opening and shutting each eye, he sighed and paused
and started and stopped. Danlo thought that he must be three
quarters asleep, so long did it take him to get the words out.
'Mallory Ringess was a pilot, yes?'
 'Oh, yes,' Old Father said. 'A brilliant pilot. He became the
Lord Pilot of the Order, and then, at the end, the Lord of the
Order itself. Many people hated him; some loved him. There was
something about him, the way he compelled people's love or
hate. Twelve years ago, there was schism in the Order. And war.
And the Ringess was a warrior, among other things. So, it's so:
a very angry, violent man. And secretive, and cruel, and vain.
Oh ho, but he was also something else. An unusually complex
man. A kind man. And noble, and fated, and compassionate. He
loved truth – even his enemies would admit that. He devoted his
life to a quest for the Elder Eddas, the secret of the gods.
Some say he found this secret and became a god; some say he
failed and left the City in disgrace.'
  Danlo thought about this for a while. Drisana's tea room was
a good place for reflection. In some ways it reminded him of a
snow hut's interior: clean, stark and lit by natural flames.
High on the granite walls, atop little wooden shelves, were ten
silver candelabra. All around the room, candles burned with a
familiar yellow light. The smells of hot wax and carbon mingled
with pine and the sickly sweet fetor which old people exude
when they are almost ready to go over. Danlo traced his finger
along his forehead and wondered aloud, 'Is it possible for a
man to become a god? For a civilized man? How can such a thing
be possible? Men are men; why should a man want to be a god?'
  He wondered if Old Father was lying or speaking
metaphorically. Or perhaps, in such a shaida place as a city, a
man really could aspire to godhood. Danlo really didn't
understand civilized people, nor could he conceive of the kinds
of gods they might become. And then he had a startling thought:
it wasn't necessary for him to understand
123
everything in order to accept Drisana's and Old Father's
story. As his first conscious act as an asarya, he would say
'yes' to this fantastic notion of a man's journey godward, at
least until he could see things more clearly.
 He turned to Old Father and asked, 'What are the Elder
Eddas?'
  'Oh ho, the Elder Eddas! No one is quite sure. Once there
was a race of gods, the Ieldra, once, once, three million years
ago. When human beings lived in trees; when the Fravashi still
warred with each other, clan against clan. The Ieldra, it's
said, discovered the secret of the universe. The Philosopher's
Stone. The One Tree, the Burning Bush, Pure Information, the
Pearl of Great Price. Aha, the River of Light, the Ring of
Scutarix, the Universal Program, the Eschaton. And the Golden
Key, the Word, even the Wheel of Law. So, it's so: the Elder
Eddas. God. In a way, the Ieldra became God, or became as one
with God. It's said that they carked their minds – ah, ah,
their very consciousness – into the singularity at the galaxy's
core. Into a spinning black hole. But before their final
evolution, a gift. A bequest from the Ieldra to their chosen
successors. Not the Fravashi, it's said. Not the Darghinni. Nor
the Scutari, nor the Farahim, nor the Friends of Man. It's said
that the Ieldra carked their secrets into human beings only;
long ago they encoded the Elder Eddas into the human genome.
Wisdom, madness, infinite knowledge, racial memory – all of
these and more. It's thought that certain segments of human DNA
code the Elder Eddas as pure memory. And so, inside all human
beings, a way of becoming gods.'
 While Danlo stared at the flame shadows dancing atop the
floor, he smiled with curiosity and amusement. Finally, he
asked, 'And what is DNA?'
 'Ah, so much to learn, but you needn't learn it just now. The
main point is this: The Ringess showed the way to remember the
Elder Eddas, and people hated him for that. Why? All is one,
you say, and man shall be as gods?
124
 Creation and memory – God is memory? So, it's so: there's a
way for anyone to remember the Elder Eddas, but here is the
most ironic of ironies: many can hear the Eddas within
themselves but few can understand.'
  Danlo closed his eyes, listening. The only sound inside was
the beating of his heart. 'I do not hear anything,' he said.
 Old Father smiled, and as Danlo had, closed both his eyes.
  Drisana was savouring her fourth glass of wine, and she
finally spoke to Danlo in his language, 'Kareeska, Danlo, grace
beyond grace. It's been a long time since I spoke Alaloi;
please forgive me if I make mistakes.' After a long sip of
wine, she continued, There are techniques of remembering, of
listening. You chose an exciting time to enter the Order.
Everyone is trying to learn the remembrancing art, certainly
they are. If you're accepted into Borja, perhaps you'll learn
it, too.'
  Her voice was slurry with wine and bitterness. Once, at the
beginning of the Great Schism, because she had believed the
Order was corrupt and doomed, she had renounced her position as
master imprimatur. And now, twelve years later, there was a
renewal of spirit and vision in the towers of the Academy, and
the Order was more vital than it had been in a thousand years.
If given the chance, she would have rejoined the Order, but for
those who abjure their vows, there is never a second chance.
  Danlo, who was quite unafraid to touch old people, took
Drisana's hand and held it as he would his grandmother's. He
liked the acceptance he saw in her sad, lovely eyes, though he
wondered why she would be so bitter. The gods have imprinted
human beings with the Elder Eddas, yes?'
 'No, certainly not!' Drisana did not explain that it was she,
herself, who had once imprinted Mallory Ringess, and therefore
she was partly responsible for creating the Ringess and all
the chaos of the war. The memory of the
125
Eddas lies deeper than the brain. When we speak of an
imprinting, we speak merely of changing the metabolic pathways
and the neural network. It's all a matter of redefining the
synapses of the brain.'
'Fixing the synapses like strands of silk in glacier ice?'
  Drisana stared at him as she took a sip of wine. Then she
started laughing, and the bitterness suddenly left her. 'Dear
Danlo, you don't understand anything about what we're going to
do here today, do you?'
 'No,' he said. 'I always thought the brain was just a store
of pink fat.'
 Drisana laughed nicely and pulled at his hand. 'Come,' she
said. 'Danlo, and my Honoured Fravashi – you'll have to help
me because I've drunk too much wine.'
  She led them through a wooden door into the imprinting room,
or her chamber of impressions, as she liked to call it. In the
centre of the imprinting room, atop the Fravashi carpet that
Old Father had once given her, was a padded chair covered with
green velvet. Aside from a couple of hologram stands behind the
chair, it was the only article of furniture in the room. On
each of the six walls, from ceiling to floor, were polished
shelves holding up what looked like gleaming, metal skulls.
There were six hundred and twenty-two of these skulls, arrayed
neatly in their rows. These are the heaumes,' Drisana explained
as she sat Danlo down on this chair. 'You've certainly seen a
heaume before?'
 Danlo sat stiffly in the chair, craning his neck, looking at
the heaumes. Ahira, Ahira, he silently called, why would anyone
collect metal skulls?
  Drisana wobbled on her feet as she ran her hands through his
hair, roughly sizing his head. He had a large head for a boy
fourteen years old, large and broad, and she turned to select a
heaume from the third row from the top. 'First, we have to make
a model of your brain,' she said.
'A model?'
126
'A picture. Like a painting.'
 While Old Father sat down on the rug in the Fravashi fashion
to watch, she fit the heaume over Danlo's head. Danlo held his
breath, then slowly let it out. The heaume was cold, even
through his thick hair. The heaume was hard and cold, and it
tightly squeezed his skull. Something important was about to
happen, he thought, though he couldn't quite tell what. Through
the dark hallways of Drisana's shop, he had kept his sense of
direction. He was sure he was facing east. One must piss to the
south, sleep with one's head to the north, but all important
ceremonies must occur facing east. How could Drisana know this?
  'A painting of your brain,' Drisana slurred out. Her breath
was heavy over his face and smelled of wine. 'We'll paint it
with light.'
  Directly behind Danlo's chair, one of the hologram stands
suddenly lit up with a model of his brain. There, seemingly
floating above the stand, were the glowing folds of his
cerebral cortex, the cerebellum and medulla and the vivid chasm
splitting the brain into halves. Danlo felt nothing, but he
sensed a gleam of light from his side and turned to look.
'Stop!' Drisana cried out.
 It was too late. Danlo had been blindly obedient only once in
his life, during his passage into manhood, on pain of death.
How could he help looking at a painting of his brain? He
looked, and in the back of the model of his brain, the visual
cortex flared with orange light. He looked at his own visual
cortex, painted bright with orange and orange-red, and the very
act of looking caused the neurons within the cortex to fire. As
he looked and looked, suddenly the light was blindingly,
brilliantly red. The light was a red spearpoint through his
eyes into his brain. The pain was quick, sharp and intense. Old
Father had been wrong; there was a hideous pain. He closed his
eyes and looked away. The pain fell off into a white heat and a
burning, terrible pain.
127
  Drisana grasped his face in her withered hands and gently
turned him facing forward. 'You mustn't look at your brain's
own model! Soon, we'll go deeper, down to the neurons. The
neuro-transmitter flow, the electricity. Your thoughts – you
would be able to see your own thoughts. And that's so
dangerous. Seeing your thoughts as they form up – that itself
would create another thought for you to see. The feedback, the
infinities. Certainly, the process could go on to infinity,
but you'd be insane or dead long before then.'
 Danlo stared straight ahead. He held himself very still. He
was sweating now, beads of salt water squeezed between his
forehead and the heaume. 'Ahira, Ahira,' he whispered. 'O
blessed Ahira!'
  'Now be still. Before we can make an imprinting, we must see
where to imprint.'
 Even though Drisana was half drunk, she laid his brain bare
as deftly and easily as he might slit open a snow hare's
belly. Before she had learned the art of imprinting, she had
been an akashic. As an akashic, she had done many thousands of
brain mappings. All imprimaturs are also akashics, though few
akashics know much about the art of imprinting. In truth, it
is easier to map and read a brain than it is to imprint it.
For no good reason – and this is a bitter irony – the akashics
possess a much higher status in the Order than do the lowly
imprimaturs.
'Close your eyes, now,' Drisana called out softly.
 Danlo closed his eyes. Behind him, his brain's model rippled
with light waves. The language clusters in the left hemisphere
were magnified and highlighted. The neural network was dense
and profoundly complex. Millions of individual neurons, like
tiny, glowing red spiders, were packed into a three-dimensional
web. From each neuron grew thousands of dendrites, thousands of
red, silken strands which sought each other out and connected
at the synapses.
'Danlo, ni luria la shantih,' Drisana said, and his
128
association cortex fairly jumped with light. And then, 'Ti asto
yujena oyu, you have eyes that see too deeply and too much.'
  'Oh ho, that's true!' Old Father broke in. 'Yujena oyu – so,
it's so.'
 Drisana held up a hand to silence him, and she spoke other
words in other languages, words that failed to bring Danlo's
association cortex to life. In a few moments, Drisana
determined that Alaloi was his milk tongue, and more, that he
knew no others except Moksha and a smattering of the Language.
It was an extraordinary thing to discover, and she probably
longed to immediately spread this news in the various cafes and
bars, but as an imprimatur she was obliged to keep secrets.
 'Now we have the model; now we will make the actual
imprinting.'
 She removed the heaume from Danlo's head. While he brushed
back his sodden hair, she walked over to the far wall behind
Old Father to search for a particular heaume. She tried to
explain the fundamentals of her art, though it must have been
difficult to find words in the Alaloi language to convey her
meaning. Danlo quickly became confused. In truth, imprinting is
both simple and profound. Every child is born with a certain
array of synapses connecting neuron to neuron. This array is
called the primary repertoire and is determined partly by the
genetic programs and partly by the self-organizing properties
of the growing brain. Learning occurs, simply, when certain
synapses are selected and strengthened at the expense of
others. The blueness of the sky, the pain of ice against the
skin – every colour, each crackling twig, smell, idea or fear
burns its mark into the synapses. Gradually, event by event,
the primary repertoire is transformed into the secondary
repertoire. And this transformation – the flowering of a human
being's selfness and essence, one's very soul – is
evolutionary. Populations of neurons and synapses compete for
sensa and thoughts. Or rather, they
129
compete to make thoughts. The brain is its own universe and
thoughts are living things which thrive or die according to
natural laws.
  Drisana eased the new heaume over Danlo's head. It was
thicker than the first heaume and heavier. Above the second
hologram stand, a second model of Danlo's brain appeared. Next
to it, the first model remained lit. As the imprinting
progressed, Drisana would continually compare the second model
to the first, down to the molecular level; she would need to
see both models – as well as the tone of Danlo's blue-black
eyes – to determine when he had imprinted enough for one day.
 'So many synapses,' Drisana said. Ten trillion synapses in
the cortex alone.'
  Danlo made a fist and asked, 'What do the synapses look
like?'
 'They're modelled as points of light. Ten trillion points of
light.' She didn't explain how neurotransmitters diffuse across
the synapses, causing the individual neurons to fire. Danlo
knew nothing of chemistry or electricity. Instead, she tried to
give him some idea of how the heaume's computer stored and
imprinted language. The computer remembers the synapse
configuration of other brains, brains that hold a particular
language. This memory is a simulation of that language. And
then in your brain, Danlo, select synapses are excited directly
and strengthened. The computer speeds up the synapses' natural
evolution.'
  Danlo tapped the bridge of his nose; his eyes were dark and
intent upon a certain sequence of thought. The synapses are not
allowed to grow naturally, yes?'
  'Certainly not. Otherwise imprinting would be impossible.'
 'And the synapse configuration – this is really the learning,
the essence of another's mind, yes?'
'Yes, Danlo.'
'And not just the learning – isn't this so? You imply that
130
anything in the mind of another could be imprinted in my
mind?'
 'Almost anything.'
 'What about dreams? Could dreams be imprinted?'
'Certainly.'
'And nightmares?'
 Drisana squeezed his hand and reassured him. 'No one would
imprint a nightmare into another.'
'But it is possible, yes?'
Drisana nodded her head.
'And the emotions ... the fears or loneliness or rage?'
 'Those things, too. Some imprimaturs – certainly they're the
dregs of the City – some do such things.'
 Danlo let his breath out slowly. Then how can I know what is
real and what is unreal? Is it possible to imprint false
memories? Things or events that never happened? Insanity?
Could I remember ice as hot or see red as blue? If someone
else looked at the world through shaida eyes, would I be
infected with this way of seeing things?'
 Drisana wrung her hands together, sighed, and looked
helplessly at Old Father.
 'Oh ho, the boy is difficult, and his questions cut like a
sarsara!' Old Father stood up and painfully limped over to
Danlo. Both his eyes were open, and he spoke clearly. 'All
ideas are infectious, Danlo. Most things learned early in life,
we do not choose to learn. Ah, and much that comes later. So,
it's so: the two wisdoms. The first wisdom: as best we can, we
must choose what to put into our brains. And the second wisdom:
the healthy brain creates its own ecology; the vital thoughts
and ideas eventually drive out the stupid, the malignant and
the parasitical.'
 Because Danlo's forehead was wet and itched, he tried to
force his finger up beneath the heaume, but it was too tight.
He said, Then you are not afraid that the words of the Language
will poison me?'
 'Oh ho, all languages are poison,' Old Father said. His eyes
were bright with appreciation of Danlo's unease. 'But
131
that's why you've learned Moksha and the Fravashi way, as an
antidote to such poisons.'
  Danlo trusted nothing about the whole unnatural process of
imprinting, but he trusted Old Father and trusted Drisana, too.
He made a quick decision to affirm this trust. Follow your
fate, he thought, and he tapped the heaume. 'I shall learn the
Language now, yes?'
  The imprinting of Danlo's brain took most of the day. It was
painless, without incident or sensation. He sat quiet and still
while Drisana spoke to the heaume's computer in an artificial
language that neither he nor Old Father could understand. She
selected the sequence of imprinting, and, with the computer's
aid, she monitored his brain chemistry: the concentrations of
the neurotransmitters, the MAP2 molecules, the synapsin and
kinase and the thousands of other brain proteins. Layer by
glowing layer, she laid his cortex bare and imprinted it.
  Once, Danlo asked, 'Where are the new words? Why can't I
feel the Language as it takes hold? Why can't I hear it or
think it?' And then he had a terrifying thought: If the heaume
could add memories to his brain, perhaps it could remove them
just as easily. And if it did, how would he ever know?
  Drisana had brought in a chair from the tea room and was
sighing heavily (she had also brought in another glass of
wine); she was much too old to remain standing during the
entire course of an imprinting. She said, 'The heaume shuts off
the new language clusters from the rest of your brain until
it's over. You certainly wouldn't want to be bothered thinking
in a new language until a good part of it was in place, would
you? Now you must think of something pleasant, perhaps a happy
memory or a daydream to occupy your time.'
  Usually, an imprinting required three sessions, but Drisana
found that Danlo was accepting the Language quickly and well.
His eyes remained bright and focused. She let the imprinting
go on until he had nine tenths of the words,
132
 and then she decided that that was quite enough. She removed
the heaume, took a sip of wine, and sighed.
  Old Father stood up and said, 'Thank you,' he walked up and
placed his furry hand over Danlo's head. His black fingernails
were hard against Danlo's temple. Speaking in the Language,
Old Father said, 'Drisana is kind, very kind and very
beautiful, don't you think?'
 Without thought or hesitation, Danlo replied, 'Oh, yes, she
is radiant with shibui. She is ... what I mean to say,
shibui...' The words died in his mouth because he was suddenly
excited and confused. He was speaking the Language! He was
speaking fluently words he had never heard before. Did he
understand what he had said? Yes, he did understand. Shibui: a
kind of beauty that only time can reveal. Shibui was the subtle
beauty of grey and brown moss on an old rock. And the taste of
an old wine which recalled a ripening of grapes and the perfect
balance of sun, wind and rain – that too was shibui. Drisana's
face radiated shibui– 'radiate' was not quite the right word –
her face revealed the grain of her character and her life's
experiences as if it were a piece of ivory painstakingly and
beautifully carved by time.
  He rubbed his temple slowly and said, 'What I mean is ...
she has her own face.' Then, realizing that he had fallen back
on an Alaloi expression, he began thinking of the many
conceptions and words for beauty. There were the new words:
sabi, awarei and hozhik. And wabi: the unique beauty of a
flawed object, such as a teapot with a crack; the beautiful,
distinctive, aesthetic flaw that distinguishes the spirit of
the moment in which an object was created from all other
moments in eternity. And always, there was halla. If halla was
the beauty, the harmony and balance of life, then the other
words for beauty were lesser words, though they were connected
to halla in many ways. In truth, each of the new words revealed
hidden aspects of halla and helped him to see it more clearly.
133
 'O, blessed beauty! I never knew ... that there were so many
ways of looking at beauty.'
  For a while, the three of them talked about beauty. Danlo
spoke haltingly because he was unsure of himself. Suddenly to
have a new language inside was the strangest of feelings. It
was like entering a dark cave, like climbing toward the faint
sound of falling water, and all the while being possessed of an
eerie sense that there were many pretty pebbles to be found but
not quite knowing where to look. He had to search for the right
words, and he struggled to put them together.
 'So much to ... comprehend,' he said. 'In this blessed
Language, there is so much ... passion. So many powerful
ideas.'
  'Oh ho!' Old Father said. The Language is sick with ideas.'
 Danlo looked at the many rows of heaumes and tapped the
heaume that Drisana was still holding in her hand. The whole of
the Language is inside here, yes?'
'Certainly,' she said, and she nodded at him.
  'And other languages, you say? How many ... languages?'
  Drisana, who was bad with numbers, said, 'More than ten
thousand but certainly less than fifty thousand.'
  'So many,' he mused. His eyes took on a faraway look, as of
ice glazing over the dark blue sea. 'So many ... how could
human beings ever learn so many?'
'He's beginning to see it,' Old Father said.
  Drisana put the heaume down atop the inactive hologram stand
and smiled at Danlo. Her face was warm and kind. 'I think
you've had enough conversation for one day. Now you should go
home and sleep. Then you'll dream of what you've learned and
tomorrow your speech will come more easily.'
  'No,' Old Father said sharply. He directed a few quick
whistles at her, then said, 'Imprinting is like giving a
newborn the ability to walk without strengthening the leg
134
 muscles. Let him use the Language a little more, lest he
stumble later when he can least afford to.'
'But he's too tired!'
  'No, look at his eyes, look how he sees; now he is liminal,
oh ho!'
 Liminal, Danlo thought, to be on the threshold of a new
concept or way of viewing things. Yes, he was certainly
liminal; his heart pounded and his eyes ached because he was
beginning to see too much. He stood up and began pacing around
the room. To Drisana, he said, 'Besides languages, there are
many ... categories of knowledge, yes? History, and what
Fayeth calls eschatology, and many others. And all may be
imprinted?'
'Most of them.'
'How many?'
  Drisana was silent as she looked at Old Father. He gave
forth a long, low whistle, then said, 'Oh, oh, if you learned
all of a heaume's forty thousand languages, it would be like
standing alone on a beach with a drop of water in your hand
while an ocean roared beyond you.'
 'That's quite enough!' Drisana snapped. 'Such a sadist you
are.'
'Oh ho'.'
  Danlo threw his hand over his eyes and rubbed them. Then he
stared up at the ceiling for a long time. At last he was seeing
the great ocean of knowledge and truth as it opened before him.
The ocean was as deep and bottomless as space, and he could see
no end to the depths. He was drowning in deepness; the air in
the room was so thick and close that he could hardly catch his
breath. If he must learn all the truths of the universe, then
he would never know halla. 'Never,' he said. And then, cursing
for the first time in his life: There is ... too damn much to
know!'
  Drisana sat him down in the velvet chair and pressed her
wine glass into his hand. 'Here, take a sip of wine. It will
calm you. Certainly, no one can know everything. But why would
you want to?'
135
 With a humming sound that was two thirds of a laugh, Old
Father said, There's a word that will help you. You must know
what this word is.'
'A word?'
  Old Father began whistling in fugue, and he said, 'A word.
Think of it as a culling word. So, it's so: those who grasp the
intricacies and implications of this word are culled, chosen to
swim in a sea of knowledge where others must drown. Search your
memory; you know this word.'
 Danlo closed his eyes, and there in the darkness, like a star
falling out of the night, was the word. 'Do you mean "shih",
sir?' he asked. 'I must learn shih, yes?'
  Shih was the opposite of facts and raw information; shih was
the elegance of knowledge, the insight and skill to organize
knowledge into meaningful patterns. As an artist chooses
colours of paint or light to make her pictures, so a master of
shih chooses textures of knowledge – various ideas, myths,
abstractions, and theories – to create a way of seeing the
world. The aesthetics and beauty of knowledge – this was shih.
 'Just so, shih,' Old Father said. 'An old word for an old,
old art.'
  He explained that the etymon of shih was a simple word in
Old Chinese; the Fravashi had fallen in love with this word,
and they had borrowed and adapted it when they invented Moksha.
From Moksha, the concept of shih had entered into the Language
– along with thousands of other concepts and words. Those who
fear the Fravashi regard this invasion of the Language with
alien (or ancient) words as the most subtle of stratagems to
conquer the human race.
  Danlo rubbed his eyes as he listened. 'You say that shih ...
is a word of Moksha, yes?'
  'So, it's so: In Moksha, shih is used only as a verb. In the
Language, shih becomes corrupted as a noun.'
'But why haven't I been taught this word, sir?'
'Ah, ah, I've been saving it for the proper time,' Old
136
Father said. 'In the Language, shih is elegance in using one's
knowledge. But in Moksha, this broader meaning: Shih is
recognizing and making sense of different kinds of knowledge.
It's the most brilliant art, this ability to gauge the beauties
and weaknesses of different worldviews. Oh ho, now that you
have the Language in your head, you will badly need this art.
If you are to keep the civilized worldview from overwhelming
you, you must become a man of shih.'
 In a gulp, Danlo downed the rest of the wine. The tartness
and the sugars tasted good. As Drisana had said it would, it
calmed him. He talked with Drisana and Old Father about shih,
or rather, he listened while they talked. After a while the
wine made him drowsy. He shifted about, resting his head on the
chair's soft velvet arm with his legs flopped over the other
arm. He listened until the words of the Language lost their
meaning, and all the sounds of the room – Old Father's
whistling, Drisana's heavy sighs, and the faint clamour of the
cafe next door – melted into a chaotic hum.
  'Look, he's falling asleep,' Drisana said. That's certainly
enough for today. You'll bring him back tomorrow to complete
the imprinting?'
'Tomorrow or the day after.'
  Old Father roused Danlo, then, and they said their goodbyes.
Drisana rumpled his hair and warned him about the dangers of
drinking too much wine. All the way home, skating along the
noisy evening streets, Danlo overheard stray bits and snatches
of conversation. Most of the talk seemed muddled, insipid and
meaningless. He wondered how many of these chattering, confused
people understood shih?
  Old Father read the look on his face and scolded, 'Oh ho,
you must not judge others according to what you think you know.
Do not glaver, Danlo, not tonight, and not ever.'
By the time they reached Old Father's house, Danlo was
137
very tired. He fairly fell into his bed. That night he slept
with his clothes on, and he had strange dreams. He dreamed in
the words of the Language; his dreams were chaotic, without
theme or pattern or the slightest sense of shih.
138



CHAPTER FIVE

The Returnists

The minute anything – science, feminism, Buddhism, holism,
whatever – starts to take on the characteristics of a
cosmology, it should be discarded. How things are held in the
mind is infinitely more important than what is in the mind,
including this statement itself.
  – Morris Berman, Holocaust Century Historian
 The problem when people stop believing in God is not that
thereafter believe in nothing; it is that they believe in
anything.
  – G. K. Chesterton

 During the days that followed, Danlo returned often to
Drisana's shop. He imprinted much besides the Language, for
although the Order would not test the bulk or quality of his
knowledge, he still needed the anchor stones of history,
mechanics, ecology and other disciplines to support the web of
associations so necessary for understanding civilization's
complexities. He learned many astonishing things. Human beings,
it seemed, were fairly infested with tiny animals too small to
be felt or seen. These animals were called bacteria, and they
sometimes made up as much as ten percent of the body's weight.
Bacteria – and viruses and protozoa – swam in the fluids of his
eyes and filled his bowels with putrid gases; sometimes they
tunnelled deep into the tissues of his body. A few of these
organisms were harmful and caused disease. And so the people of
Neverness were afraid to touch each other for fear of
139
 infection. Most, even indoors, covered their hands with thin
leather gloves and were careful not to get too close to
strangers lest they breathe each other's exhalations. This
inhibition caused Danlo many pains. In the Alaloi manner, he
liked to brush up against Fayeth or Luister when he greeted
them in the hallways of Old Father's house. To smell their hair
or run his calloused hands over their smooth faces reassured
him of their realness and essential humanity. With great
difficulty he learned to restrain himself. Especially out on
the narrow streets of the Fravashi District, in the midst of
the manswarm, he had to skate with great care to avoid the
swish of perfumed silk or sweat-stained woollens. It vexed him
that casual bumping – the slightest of accidental contact –
required immediate apology. Even to look purposefully at
another, to touch eye to eye or let one's gaze linger too long,
was considered provocative and gauche.
  Of course, he still knew nothing of slelling. He couldn't
guess that slel neckers sometimes steal another's DNA in order
to tailor specific viruses to kill in horrible and specific
ways. (Or sometimes, in the unspeakable art of slel mime, a
victim's brain is replaced neuron by neuron with programmed
neurologics, gradually converted to a slave unit and taken
over.) Once, it occurred to him that a virus might have
infected and killed his people – how else to explain his
tribe's death? He marvelled at the extension of the world's
ecology to include such tiny, parasitical beasts. Viruses, he
thought, were really just another kind of animal that preyed on
the cells of human beings, no more fearsome than snow tigers or
lice or bears. He wondered, however, how viruses could kill his
whole tribe all at once. A bear might stalk and slay a solitary
hunter, but never an entire band of men bristling with spears.
Such an event would be shaida, a complete unbalancing of the
world's way. He could only guess that something must have
happened to ruin his tribe's halla relationship with the world.
Perhaps one of the men had forgotten to pray for the spirit
 140
 of an animal he had killed; perhaps one of the women had
prepared a batch of blood-tea incorrectly, and so weakened the
bodies of all the Devaki people. In truth, he never suspected
that a civilized virus might have found its way into Haidar and
Chandra and his near-brothers and sisters; he never imagined
the making of viruses as weapons because such thoughts, for
him, were still unimaginable.
 As winter passed into deep winter and the weather grew
colder, he found himself slowly and painfully adapting to the
strangeness of the City. He spent much of each day outside
skating, exploring the convoluted, purple glidderies of the
Bell and the other districts of the Farsider's Quarter.
Learning the Language was like opening the door to a mansion
containing many fabulously decorated rooms; it enabled him to
talk with wormrunners and autists and maggids, and other people
he met on the streets. Despite his natural shyness, he loved to
talk, especially to the Order's pilots and academicians, who
could often be found eating elaborate dinners at the Hofgarten
or drinking chocolate in the many Old City cafes. Gradually,
from a hundred little remarks that these people made about the
Fravashi – as well as his participation in the meditations,
word games and other rituals of Old Father's house – he came to
see the entire Fravashi system from a new perspective. He began
to entertain doubts as to whether the Fravashi way really was a
way toward true liberation. Each evening, before the usual
Moksha competition, he sat with the other students around Old
Father and repeated the Statement of Purpose: 'Our system is
not a simple system like other systems; it is a meta-system
designed to free us from all systems. While we cannot hope to
rid ourselves of all beliefs and worldviews, we can free
ourselves from bondage to any particular belief or worldview.'
He listened as Old Father discussed the Three Paradoxes of
Life, or the Theory of Nairatmya, or the poems of Jin Zenimura,
who was one of the first human masters of Moksha. Always, Danlo
listened with half a smile on his face, even as a voice
141
 whispered in his ear that the Fravashi system, itself, might
bind him as surely as a fireflower's nectar intoxicates and
traps a fritillary.
 In truth, he did not want to accept some of the Fravashi
system's fundamental teachings. Although it was somewhat rash
of him, even presumptuous, from the very beginning he disagreed
with Old Father over the ideal and practice of the art of
plexure. This art – it is sometimes called 'plexity' – aims at
moving the student through the four stages of liberation. In
the first stage, that of the simplex, one is caught within the
bounds of a single worldview. This is the reality of a child or
an Alaloi hunter, who may not even be aware that other ways of
perceiving reality exist. Most peoples of the Civilized Worlds,
however, are aware of humanity's many religions, philosophies,
ways and worldviews. They suspect that adherence to their own
belief system is somewhat arbitrary, that had they been born as
autists or as Architects of the Infinite Life, for example,
they might venerate dreams as the highest state of reality or
worship artificial life as evolution's ultimate goal. In fact,
they might believe anything, but simplex people believe only
one thing, whatever reality their parents and culture have
imprinted into their brains. As the Fravashi say, human beings
are self-satisfied creatures who love looking into the mirror
for evidence that they are somehow brighter or more beautiful
than they really are. It is the great and deadly vanity of
human beings to convince themselves that their worldview, no
matter how unlikely or bizarre, is somehow more sane, natural,
pragmatic, holy, or truthful than any other. Out of choice – or
cowardice – most people never break out of this simplex stage
of viewing the world as through a single lens, and this is
their damnation.
  All of Old Father's students, of course, by the very act of
adopting the Fravashi system, had elevated themselves to the
complex stage of belief. To be complex is to hold at least two
different realities, perhaps at two different times
142
 of one's life. The complex woman or man will cast away beliefs
like old clothes, as they become worn or inappropriate. Using
the Fravashi techniques, it is possible to progress from one
belief system to another, ever growing, ever more flexible,
bursting free from one worldview into another as a snake sheds
an old skin. The truly complex person will move freely among
these systems as the need arises. When journeying by sled
across the frozen sea, he will have nineteen different words
for the colours of whiteness; when studying the newtonian
spectrum, she will compose wavelengths of red, green, and blue
into pure white light; when visiting the Perfect on Gehenna,
one will choose articles of clothing containing no white, since
it is obvious that white isn't really a colour at all, but
rather the absence of all colour, and thus, the absence of
light and life. The ideal of complexity, as Old Father liked to
remind his students, was the ability to move from system to
system – or from worldview to worldview – with the speed of
thought.
 'Ah, ha,' Old Father said one night, 'all of you are complex,
and some of you may become very complex, but who among you has
the strength to be multiplex?'
  The third stage of plexure is the multiplex. If complexity
is the ability to suspend and adopt different beliefs as they
are useful or appropriate, one after another, then multiplexity
is the holding of more than one reality at the same time. These
realities may be as different – or even contradictory – as the
old science and the magical thinking of a child. Truth is
multiple,' as the Old Fathers say. One can never become
multiplex if afraid of paradox or enslaved by the god of
consistency. Multiplex vision is paradoxical vision, new
logics, the sudden completion of startling patterns. The
mastery of multiplexity makes it possible to see the world in
many dimensions; it is like peering into a jewel of a thousand
different faces. When one has attained a measure of the
multiplex, the world's creation is seen as the handiwork of a
god, and a fireball exploding out of the primordial neverness,
143
and a communal dream, and the eternal crystallization of
reality out of a shimmering and undifferentiated essence – all
these things and many others, all at once. The multiplex man
(or alien) will see all truths as interlocking pans of a
greater truth. The Fravashi teach that once in every cycle of
time, one is born who will evolve from multiplexity to the
omniplex, which is the fourth and final stage of liberation.
This completely free individual is the asarya. Only the asarya
may hold all possible realities at once. Only the asarya is
able to say 'yes' to all of creation, for one must see
everything as it truly is before making the final affirmation.
 This ideal is the pinnacle of all Fravashi thought and
wisdom, and it was this very teaching that Danlo disputed above
all others. As he maintained in his discussions with Old
Father, to hold all realities and look out over the whole of
the universe was a noble and necessary step, but an asarya must
go beyond this. The entire logic of the Fravashi system pointed
toward liberation from belief systems and beliefs – why not
strive to believe nothing at all? Why not behold reality with
faultless eyes, as free from worldviews as a newborn child?
Wasn't this awakening into innocence the true virtue of an
asarya?
  'Oh, oh,' Old Father said to him, 'but everyone must believe
something. Even if one must invent one's own beliefs. It's
surprising that after half a year in my house, you haven't come
to believe this.'
  Old Father was always quick to bestow his holy sadism upon
his students, particularly one so strong-willed as Danlo. And
Danlo, for his part, quite enjoyed the intricate dance of wits
so beloved of the Fravashi. He never took hurt from any of Old
Father's jokes or calculated ridicule. And he never deluded
himself that he was close to freedom from belief. Quite the
opposite. Wilfully – and as mindfully as a hunter stepping into
a snow tiger's lair – he entered into the Fravashi worldview.
It was indeed a strange and beautiful place. While he was
always aware of the little
144
flaws in this reality waiting to widen into cracks, he
cherished the most basic of all Fravashi teachings, which was
that human beings were made to be free. He believed this
passionately, fiercely, completely. He kept the spirit of
Fravism close to his heart, like an invisible talisman cut from
pure faith. The Fravashi might misunderstand what it would mean
to be an asarya, but no matter. Their system could still be
used to smash the illusions and thoughtways imprisoning people.
And then, once released, each human being could soar free in
whatever direction called.
  The Fravashi system was nobly conceived, yes, but as Danlo
discovered, not all conceptions can be perfectly realized. The
Fravashi had come to Neverness three thousand years earlier,
and over time, the original teachings and practices of their
system had become too systematic. Experiments in thinking had
become reified into exercises; ideas had been squeezed into
ideology; insight hardened into doctrine; and the little graces
and devotions that the students delighted in tendering their
Old Fathers had inevitably become onerous obligations. Quite a
few students forgot that Moksha was to be used as a tool. All
too often, they worshipped this language and imagined that
learning ever more Moksha words and poems and koans would be
sufficient to free them from themselves. Nothing dismayed Danlo
more than this tendency toward worship. And no aspect of
worship was so dangerous as the way that Luister and Eduardo
and the others fell into fawning over Old Father and
surrendered their will to him.
  This, of course, is the pitfall of cults and religions
dominated by a guru, sage, or messiah. The pattern of
enslavement is ancient: a young man or woman hears the call of
a deeper world than the everyday reality of education,
marriage, amusement, or vying for wealth and social advantage.
Perhaps this person is sick with life, while dreading that
somehow, no matter every effort toward authenticity and
meaning, she has failed to really live. Perhaps, like an urchin
sampling forbidden candies, she will
145
 move from religion to religion, from way to way, in search of
something that will satisfy her hunger. If she is lucky,
eventually she will discover a way that is sweeter than the
others, a system of disciplines with a pure, living centre. If
she is very lucky, she will become a student of an Old Father,
for the Fravashi system, despite many flaws, is the best of
systems, the oldest and truest, the least corrupt. Whatever the
chosen way, there will commence a period of fasting,
meditation, dance forms, electronic simulation, prayer,
attitudes, or word drugs – anything and everything to
concentrate the student's attention on the seeming boundaries
of her selfness. The object, of course, is to smash these
boundaries as a thallow chick might break its way out of an
egg. This is the first accomplishment of all seekers. One's
worldview begins to crack and fall apart, and more, to appear
as an arbitrary construct. The student begins to see how she
herself has constructed her own reality. If she is perceptive,
she will see how she has constructed her very self. Inevitably,
she will ask the questions: what is a self? What is a
worldview? She will see all the prejudices, delusions,
memories, psychic armouring, and little lies that protect the
'I' from the outside world. Having gone this far, she may lose
her sense of reality altogether. This is the dangerous moment.
This is the time of heart flutters and flailing, of being lost
in a dark room and unable to find the light key on the wall. It
is a time for floating in fear, or worse, of falling alone into
the cold inner ocean that pulls and chills and drowns. The
student will feel herself dying; she will have a horrifying
sense that every essential part of her is melting away into
neverness. If she is weak, her terror of death will paralyze
her or even plunge her into madness. But if she has courage,
she will see that she is not really alone. Always, the Old
Father remains close by her side. His smiles and his golden
eyes remind her that he once made the same journey as she. His
whole being is a mirror reflecting a single truth: that
something great and beautiful will survive even as the
146
student loses herself. The Old Father will help the student
find this greater part of herself. This is his glory. This is
his delight. He will help the student completely break through
the worldview that traps her. And then, as the student cleans
away the last slimy bits of eggshell, selfness, and certainty
that cling to her, a vastly greater world opens before her.
This world is brilliant with light and seems infinitely more
real than she ever could have imagined. She, herself, is freer,
vaster, profoundly alive. Intense feelings of joy and love
overwhelm her. This is the eternal moment, the awakening that
should set the student free on the path toward complete
liberation. Only, it is here that most students fall into a
subtle and deadly trap. Their joy of freedom becomes gratitude
toward the Old Father for freeing them; their love of the real
becomes attached to the one who made possible this experience
of reality. Indeed, they cannot imagine ever making this
journey again, by themselves, for themselves, and so their
natural love of the Old Father becomes a needy and sickly
thing. They begin to revere their Old Father, not as a mere
guide or teacher, but as a mediator between themselves and the
new world they have seen. And then it is but one small step to
worshipping the Old Father as an incarnation of the infinite.
Only through the Old Father (or through the roshi or priest or
buddha) can the real reality be known. His every word is a
sweet fruit bursting with truth; his system of teaching becomes
the only way that this truth might be known. And so the student
who has flown so high and so far comes at last to a new
boundary, but nothing so well-defined and fragile as her
original worldview. She looks into her Old Father's eyes and
beholds herself as vastened and holy, but sadly, this new sense
of herself is something that he has created and grafted onto
her. Her reality is now completely Fravashi. If she is truly
aware – and truly valorous – she will try once more to break
her way free. But the Fravashi worldview is sublime; escaping
it is like a bird trying to break through the sky. Most
147
 students will fail to do so; in truth, most will never
attempt such an act of ingratitude and rebellion. But even in
failure, it is still their pride to soar above the swarms of
humanity earthbound and closed in by their familiar and
self-made horizons.
 To be fair to the Fravashi, the Old Fathers have long
recognized the dangers of guruism. They have done everything
possible to discourage their students' slavish attachments to
them. But the truth is, they like being gurus. And despite
every warning, their students take solace in abandoning
themselves and trusting their fates to a white-furred alien. In
Old Father's house this was true of Salim and Michael and Ei
Eleni, and of most of the others. It was especially true of
Luister Ottah. As Old Father had said, he was a gentle man, a
kind man, a living jewel among men – but he was not a man to
return Old Father's sarcasm and jokes in the spirit with which
they were offered. Luister composed koans and irreverent poems
in Moksha out of duty only, because he was challenged to keep
up a certain level of repartee. But he was really much happier
simply drinking tea at Old Father's feet, while listening
attentively and then parroting Old Father's views or words of
wisdom. And there was no arguing with Luister once these views
had been pronounced. Although Danlo liked Luister as much as
anyone he'd met since coming to Neverness, during the short
days of deep winter, he began to find him tiresome. Luister
instructed Danlo in chess and etiquette and Moksha, as well as
skating, and so Danlo found himself in his company more than he
would have wished. Luister was somewhat of a polymath, and he
enjoyed holding forth on every subject from Lavic architecture
to causal decoupling to the journeys of the Tycho – or
fenestration, or free will, or the dangers of ohrworms and
information viruses. Unfortunately, however, none of his
opinions or insights was his own. He had the irritating habit
of prefacing his remarks with the phrase: 'Old Father says
that...' he seemed to have memorized every word that Old Father
148
 ever spoke. 'Old Father says that buildings of organic stone
tend toward the grandiloquent and have no place in human
cities,' he told Danlo one dark and snowy morning. And then
later that night, 'Old Father says that the greatest trick of
religions is in saving people from infinite regresses. Consider
the question: "What caused the universe?" The natural answer is
that God caused the universe. Aha, but then one is tempted to
ask: "But what caused God?" Ho, ho. And so on – do you see?
Religions break the regress. They tell us this: God caused the
universe, and God causes God, and this is all that anyone needs
to know.'
  The closer Danlo penetrated to the heart of the Fravashi
system, ironically, the more aware he became that in the city
of Neverness, there were many other systems, many other ways.
He began to wonder about these ways. Although he never forgot
his hope of becoming a pilot, of journeying to Camilla Luz and
Nonablinka and inward to the universe's centre, he still had a
half year to wait before he might be admitted to the Order. Of
course, he might not be admitted to the Order, and then he
would have to remain as Old Father's student. (Or return to one
of the Alaloi tribes west of Kweitkel.) Because he couldn't
imagine becoming like Luister Ottah – and because he was as
hungry for experience as a wolf pup sniffing up nosefuls of new
snow – he decided to spend the next two hundred days exploring
certain worldviews which he found either fascinating or utterly
strange. No rule or pronouncement of Old Father's forbade such
exploration. In fact, Old Father often encouraged the donning
of different realities, but only as a formal game, played out
beneath the sound of chimes and chanting that echoed through
his house. Danlo suspected that his method of knowing different
ways would not meet the approval of the others, and so, during
his daily outings, he began to visit certain parts of the City
in secret.
   During an unexpected lull in deep winter's cold, when air
was clear and the sky softened to a warm falu blue,
149
Danlo began to frequent the Street of Smugglers where it
narrows below the Fravashi District. There, he befriended men
and women of the autist sect, and he sat with them on
lice-ridden furs and spent whole days and nights lost in deep,
lucid, communal dreams, which the autist dream guides claim are
the real reality, much more real than the material world of
snow or rocks or the ragged clothes that the autists wrap
around their emaciated bodies. Likewise he joined a group of
mushroom eaters who called themselves the Children of God. Deep
in the Farsider's Quarter, in secret ceremonies held inside one
of the abandoned Cybernetic churches, he bowed before a golden
urn heaped high with magic mushrooms and solemnly prayed before
opening his mouth and taking the 'Flesh of God' inside himself.
He prayed, as well, to the shimmering emerald aliens who came
to him during the most vivid of his mushroom visions. In truth,
he came to worship these delightful and beguiling entities as
messengers of the One God, that is, until he tired of worship
altogether and sought out more sober (and sobering)
experiences.
 Sometime in midwinter spring, after Danlo had passed his
fifteenth birthday with no more ceremony than a few prayers to
his dead mother, he made contact with a group of men and women
who called themselves the Order of True Scientists. Of course,
there are many who consider themselves as scientists, or
rather, as the intellectual heirs of the Galileo and the Newton
and others who began the great journey through the universe of
number and reason. There are holists and logicians,
complementarianists and mechanics and grammarians. There are
practitioners of the Old Science and the faithful of the New
Science of God. There are many, many sciences, almost as many
as the hundreds of different sects of the Cybernetic Universal
Church. As Danlo learned, the second greatest event in the
intellectual history of the human race was the clading off of
science into different schools, each with its own epistemology
and set of beliefs, each one practising its own
 150
methodology, each one with its own notion as to what science
really is. There were those sciences which clove to
metaphysical and epistemological realism and those which
treated science as a grand, but ultimately meaningless game.
Some sciences continued to rely on physical experiments to
validate their theories while others used computers or pure
mathematical theorems to probe the nature of reality.
Individual sciences might resemble each other no more than a
man does a Darghinni, but they all had at least one thing in
common: each science claimed a privileged status and denigrated
all others as inferior or false.
  This was especially the way of the Order of True Scientists.
Of all the cults that Danlo was to encounter during his stay in
Neverness, this was the hardest for him to penetrate, the most
bizarre. As a prospective Scientist – the leaders of this
quaint cult are always desperate to find new members and they
will recruit almost anybody – Danlo was required to accept the
doctrines of Scientism. To begin with, in front of seven master
Scientists wearing their traditional white gowns, he had to
make the Profession of Faith: that Science is not merely a tool
for understanding or modelling reality, but the one path to
truth. There was the Creed of Chance, that all phenomena in the
universe are the result of bits of matter moving about and
colliding, endlessly, randomly, meaninglessly. He learned the
closely related Doctrine of Mechanism, that all things can be
explained by reducing them to the mechanisms of pieces of
matter causing other pieces to move. Danlo, of course, as a
child of the Alaloi, had always regarded the world and
everything in it as holy. He had the greatest trouble, at
first, in seeing rocks and trees and water as being composed of
nothing more than atoms or quarks, bits of interchangeable
stuff that were without purpose or life. The logic of this view
almost demanded a certain kind of action: if matter was
fundamentally dead, then there was nothing wrong with vexing
and perturbing it until it yielded its secrets. The Scientists
worshipped logic, and so the first
151
duty of any scient man was to make experiments as to the
nature of things. The ancient Scientists, he learned, once
built machines the size of mountains (and later whole planets)
in order to smash matter into ever tinier pieces, always
looking for the tiniest piece, always in hope of discovering
the ultimate cause of consciousness and all creation. Because
they always discovered more questions than they did answers,
they designed their experiments toward understanding the 'how'
of nature instead of the 'why'. In one of the first of these
experiments, when the Scientists transmuted matter into pure
energy and exploded the first atomic bomb, they almost ignited
the atmosphere of Old Earth. But their calculations told them
that this would not happen, and they had faith in these
calculations, and so life on Earth was spared for a few more
years.
  To accept experiments and experimenting as a valid way of
knowing reality – to accept that only that which can be
measured is real – Danlo had to turn his thinking inside-out,
to whelve, as the Fravashi say. He had to learn to regard the
world as an objective thing that he could understand only as an
observer, studying events and phenomena from the outside
looking in, much as a voyeur might peep through a window in
hope of catching a man and woman engaged in love play. As he
told Old Father much later, after he had whelved once again and
returned to his old thoughtways: The Scientists study the
effects of cold on an organism with thermocouples and theories,
and they say they understand everything ... that can be
understood. But they do not really know cold. They seem never
to have experienced it. And why not? It would be a simple
experiment to perform, yes? All they need do is remove their
gowns and walk outside in the snow.'
  He, himself, performed the experiments required of him only
with difficulty. He disavowed any use of living animals,
preferring instead, for example, to immerse himself in a bath
of ice water during his experiments in the survival of cold.
Some of the classical experiments he would never
152
 make, such as dissecting a snowworm's nervous system as a way
of appreciating that animal's unique consciousness. He could
never wholly consent to this kind of analysis, for miring his
passage on the mountain with Three-Fingered Soli he had made
certain promises as an Alaloi man, and the Alaloi so love the
world that if they chance to kick over a rock, they will
replace it in its exact position in order to restore the world
to halla. The truth is, he would have made a poor Scientist,
and the masters of this cult must have mistrusted him from the
beginning. But then, the Scientists mistrust everyone. Most
peoples and other orders regard the Method of the Scientists as
an outmoded and barbarous art, and they have done everything
possible to suppress this cult. Because of long persecution,
the Scientists automatically suspect new members of being spies
sent to report on them. And so new members are tested in many
ways before they are allowed access to secret information and
secret experiments. Although Danlo never witnessed any of these
illegal experiments, through a friend of a friend, he heard a
rumour about one of them.
  It seemed that in one of their buildings in the Darghinni
District, deep underground in windowless, locked rooms, the
Scientists were performing experiments on the embryos of
various alien species. Apparently, one of the master
Scientists was trying to cark Scutari blastulas into a shape
more to his liking. In most animals, alien or earth-type, the
critical point in development is not the fertilization of the
egg, but rather gastrulation. It is only during gastrulation,
after the egg has divided and redivided many times and shaped
itself into a hollow ball of cells called a blastula, that the
development of organs, limbs and other body parts begins. Some
of the cells on the exterior of the blastula are destined to
become eyes or wings or fibrillets: the gut of most animals is
typically formed in this manner: a group of cells on the
blastula's surface begins to indent and push toward the ball's
opposite side. The blastula
153
 deforms as if a finger were pushing into a balloon.
Eventually, the group of cells will push completely through the
other side, forming a hollow tube from a sphere. One end of the
tube will be the mouth, while the other will be the anus. Most
animals are formed around such a digestive tube, with sheets of
cells circling and contracting and branching out to make the
rest of the body's tissues. But the Scutari are different.
During the gastrulation of this species, the original group of
cells never quite meets the opposite wall, and so the Scutari
are shaped more like wine cups than tubes. It was an experiment
of the Scientists to interfere with Scutari gastrulation,
coaxing the blastulas that they had somehow acquired to develop
more like sea urchins or Darghinni or even human beings. And so
they had. They made many broods of doomed Scutari nymphs. While
some of these nymphs, at first, were able to ingest food almost
as continuously as a hungry harijan, the little monsters would
eventually begin vomiting up their faeces, and all of them fell
mad or died. A few master Scientists had acclaimed this
experiment a great advance in knowledge, as if they had somehow
explained Scutari law or the gruesome Scutari face or the
inexplicable mind of the Scutari adults. But Danlo could not
see it in such a light. In fact, upon hearing that certain
masters were dissecting living nymphs in order to ascertain the
cause of their madness, he formally abjured his Profession of
Faith and quit the Scientists. Although he never abjured
Science itself – he would always cherish the cold, terrible
glory of Science, and he would use this lens cautiously, like a
polarized glass made for looking at the sun – he had finally
discovered a limit to the ideal of complexity and the holding
of different worldviews.
 To enter into a new reality completely is not merely to
cherish this reality or to perceive things in a new way, but to
remake one's being and to act in accordance with new rules.
However, not all worldviews are equal in truth, and not all
acts are permissible. As to what the most truthful
154
 worldview might be, generations of philosophers and millennia
of war have not decided the answer. The Fravashi teach that
each worldview is true only relatively. Science gives a better
picture of the universe's mechanistic aspects than does
Hinduism, but has little to say about the nature of God. Many
revere this teaching, only to fall into the trap of relativism:
If all worldviews are in some way true, then nothing is really
true. Danlo, at this time, like many others before him, might
easily have descended into nihilism and denied that there could
ever be any real ground of truth. He might have concluded that
all acts, even those of a criminal or madman, are permitted.
But he never fell into this kind of despair. It was always his
faith that a free human being, if he looked deeply enough
inside himself, would find a pure burning knowledge of what was
true and what was not.
  Whatever his criticisms of Science (or the other sciences
that he would encounter), the attempts of the Scientists to
control what they defined as matter and energy fascinated him.
Even after he had left the Scientists, he harboured a fierce
curiosity about this control. From one of his friends who had
remained in the cult, he learned the implications of the
Doctrine of Entropy, that the universe was falling into
disorder, all configurations of matter across the galaxies
falling apart and spreading out like fat globules in a bowl of
lukewarm soup, all of its energies running down and seeking an
equal level, as waters run into a still lake from which they
can never escape. The Scientists preached absolute control over
all of material reality, and yet they were doomsayers who
pleaded helplessness in face of the universe's ultimate death.
It was the great discovery of this phase of Danlo's life that
this disaster might not be merely words of doctrine or some
impossibly distant event. The power to control matter and
energy, to release the energy trapped in matter, was very
immediate, very serious, very real.
One evening at twilight, just before dinner, Danlo
155
returned to Old Father's house in a state of intense
agitation. He rushed inside with news of an unbelievable thing
that he had learned earlier from one of the Scientists. For
most of the afternoon, he had been skating down near the
dangerous Street of Smugglers, skating and skating as he
breathed in the musty smell of poached shagshay furs and
brooded about cosmic events. He tromped into Old Father's
thinking chamber not even bothering to kick the ice from his
boots. (He had remembered to eject the skate blades only after
stumbling across the doorway and grinding steel, chipping the
square blue tiles in the outer hallway.) 'Ni la!' he shouted,
lapsing into his milk tongue. And then, 'Sir, I have learned
the most shaida thing, shaida if it is true, but... O blessed
God! how can it be true? About the blessed– '
 'Ho, careful now! Careful you don't drip water all over my
mother's carpet!' Old Father caught him with both of his eyes,
looked at the snowmelt running down Danlo's boots, and shook
his head. Like all Fravashi, he revered pure water and
considered it somewhat sacrilegious to scatter such a holy
substance over his mother's woven fur. That evening, he was
engaged in a thinking session with one of his students. Across
from him on his carpet (very near the spot where Danlo had once
vomited) sat Fayeth, a good-looking woman with a quick smile
and an even quicker tongue toward making jokes. She had come to
Old Father's house after a long search, after spending years as
a student of Zanshin and the Way of the Rose. She was the best
of Old Father's twelve students, the kindest, and the least
slavish, and Danlo was a little in love with her. But her age
was more than twice his, and she had taken a vow of strict
celibacy. Even so, she never resented his attentions; she
didn't seem to mind at all that he had interrupted her time
with Old Father.
  'Danlo,' she said, 'please sit with us and tell us what is
blessed.'
156
 'You're early,' Old Father said to Danlo out of one half of
his mouth. 'But, yes, please sit down. Take your boots off and
sit down.' And then, from his mouth's left side, at the same
time, he continued speaking to Fayeth: 'We must try something
more difficult this time, perhaps something that humans know
very well when thinking about it but find impossible to
explain.'
  They were playing with realities; specifically, they were
playing a game called spelad in which Fayeth, prompted by a
hint from Old Father, would name some object, idea, personage,
historical movement, or phenomenon. Old Father would then
choose a particular worldview, which Fayeth was required to
enter. She would behold the named object through this
worldview, describing its various aspects as if she had been
born a tychist or a Buddhist or even an alien. Points were
scored according to her knowledge, her sense of shih, and
above all, her mastery of plexity.
  'I'll name a concept this time,' Fayeth said. She smiled at
Danlo and continued, 'And the concept is: the future.'
  'Oh, but this is not precise enough,' Old Father said. 'Do
you know the doctrine of the sarvam asti?'
'The Hindu doctrine or that of the scryers?'
'It's your choice,' Old Father said.
'Then I'll choose the scryers' doctrine.'
  'Very well. Then let me choose a worldview. Aha, abide with
me a moment.' Old Father looked at Danlo knowingly, then
turned to Fayeth and said, 'I choose the view of the
scientists. Aha, aha – and to make this more difficult, the
ancient scientists. Before the mechanics and holists split off
from them to form their own arts.'
 Danlo had never heard of the sarvam asti: the doctrine that
everything exists, past and future, because the mind, at the
moment of conceiving all things, could not do so if they
didn't exist. In truth, at that moment, he didn't care about
games or doctrines because he had discovered the existence of
a terrible thing that he could barely conceive
 157
of. He tried to sit patiently across from Old Father, but at
last he blurted out, 'Sir, the blessed stars are exploding! Why
didn't you tell me about this?'
 'Ah, ah, the stars,' Old Father said. 'We must certainly
consider the stars. But do you mind if I play the spelad with
Fayeth? She's scored nearly enough points to be excused from
cooking next season's dinners.'
 So saying, Old Father continued his dual conversation,
talking in two different voices at once. The first (or
right-hand voice) was his usual melodious baritone; the second
voice was high and raspy, as of a saw cutting through ice.
Danlo struggled to separate the dual stream of words that
spilled out of Old Father's adroit mouth. It was a confusing
way to hold a conversation, and it demanded his intense
concentration. 'Oh ho, Fayeth, you might begin by exploring the
intersection of the ontic realm and platonic space. Oh, Danlo,
the stars are exploding, you say? The existence arguments and
suchlike. This has been known for some time. Space is space and
the stars go on endlessly through space only– '
'Sir,' Danlo interrupted, 'people are killing the stars!'
  'Ah, oh, oh, oh,' Old Father said. Then he lifted a finger
toward Fayeth and smiled. 'You may begin.'
 Fayeth hesitated a moment before saying: The sarvam asti
states that the future, in every future, the possibilities are
actualized through an act of will, and– '
  'Oh, oh, Danlo, you've learned of the Vild, so it's so. The
Vild, the far part of the galaxy where a million stars are
exploding, or ten million stars – and why?'
 ' – because existence cannot be understood as other than
quantities of matter distributed throughout a homogeneous space
and– '
 'Because human beings have a need to deform space,' Old
Father said. 'And for other reasons.'
 While Old Father had been talking with Danlo, Fayeth had
transformed herself into something like a scientist (or
Scientist), and was continuing to hold forth about the
 158
 future: ' – can be an intersection of these two spaces only in
mathematics which– '
 'Shaida reasons,' Danlo said.
  ' – certainly the mind can conceive of things that have no
existence in spacetime– '
 'Oh, ho,' Old Father said to Fayeth, 'but what is mind?'
  'When I was a child,' Danlo said, 'I used to think ... that
the stars were the eyes of my ancestors.'
 ' – runs parallel programs, and reality represented by
symbols– '
 'The stars ... this splendid eyelight.'
 ' – is not reflected in the natural world, nor is the world
really reflected in mind– '
  At this, Old Father shut his eyes for a moment and said, 'Be
careful about this word "reflect".'
  'But stars are ... just hydrogen plasma and helium,' Danlo
said. 'Easy to fusion into light.'
  ' – processing information, but macroscopic information
decays to microscopic information, and therefore the future– '
  Old Father said to Danlo, To understand the Vild, we will
have to discuss the Architects and their doctrines of the
future.'
 ' – the future is completely determined but unknowable
because– '
'It is the Architects who have created the Vild, yes?'
' – the creation of information is a chaotic process and– '
'The shaida Vild.'
 ' – there is no way for the process to run any faster than
time itself.'
  Here both Danlo and Old Father paused in their conversation
while Fayeth criticized the many-worlds hypothesis of the
mechanics and went on to declare that there could be only one
timeline, one reality, one future. The scryers' doctrine, she
said, was completely false. If scryers happened to foretell
the future, this was only, pure chance. The scryers were great
deluders, and worse, they were
159
firebrands who incited false hopes in the manswarms and caused
the people to believe impossibilities. Scryers should be
silenced for their violations of truth. They should be
collared or banished,' Fayeth said. Her face was hard and
grim, and she seemed utterly serious. 'Or their brains should
be cleansed of their delusions, as was done on Arcite before
the Order interfered. All scryers who– '
  'Ho, ho, that will be enough!' Old Father said. 'A
scientist, indeed.'
  At this, Fayeth breathed deeply and relaxed as she returned
to her usual good humour. She folded her hands on her lap,
waiting for Old Father's approval.
  'You've done well – forty points at least. Ha, ho, there
will be no kitchen work for you until next false winter.'
'Thank you,' she said.
 'And now,' Old Father said, as he turned to Danlo, 'we must
discuss the Vild. And what better place to begin than the
Doctrine of Totality. Ah, ho, Fayeth, you might want to hear
this, too.'
  Because it was cold in the thinking chamber, Danlo zipped
his collar tight around his throat and sat next to Fayeth as he
listened to Old Father's remarkable story. Old Father told them
of Nikolos Daru Ede, the first human being to become a god by
carking his mind into a computer. The idea that a man could
transfer into a machine the pattern of his brain – his
personality, memories, consciousness, his very soul –
astonished Danlo. Try as he may, he could never quite believe
that one's selfness could be encoded as a computer program. It
amused him to think of someone incarnating as a machine, even a
godly computing machine that could think a billion times faster
than any man. Who could ever know what had really happened to
Nikolos Daru Ede when he had become vastened in this impossible
way? Of course, many billions of people believed they knew
quite well. As Old Father explained, humanity's largest
religion had arisen from this singular event. Followers of Ede
worshipped this god as God, and
160
 they called themselves the Architects of God. Two thousand
years earlier, the Architects had fought a great war among
themselves, but few knew that the defeated sect, the Architects
of the Infinite Intelligence of the Cybernetic Universal
Church, after their defeat, had fled into the unknown spaces of
the galaxy that would someday become the Vild. According to Old
Father, these Architects had a plan for totally remaking the
universe according to the design of Ede the God, and so they
were demolishing the planets and the stars, one by one. 'Eleven
years ago, Mallory Ringess sent a mission to the Vild. Oh, oh,
but the mission failed. It's the talk of the City: why the Vild
mission failed and how to organize another.'
  Old Father went on to speak of the Doctrine of Totality and
other eschatological doctrines of the Edic religion. He tried
to elucidate the Architect view of free will and the fate of
the universe. Danlo was so enthralled by this story that he
almost forgot he was sitting next to Fayeth. His thoughts fell
deep and troubled, and he looked up at the dome covering the
thinking chamber. Two days ago it had snowed, and lovely, white
feathers of spindrift were frozen around the dome's western
quadrant; but to the north and east, where the dome was clear,
there were stars. His heart beat a hundred times as he studied
the milky glare of the blinkans, Nonablinka and Shurablinka.
These strange stars,' he said. 'I have always wondered about
these stars. They are supernovae, yes?'
'Oh, yes, supernovae, indeed,' Old Father said.
'But they were once stars ... just like other stars.'
'This is true.'
'Stars like ... our sun.'
'Yes, Danlo.'
'But ... how is it possible to kill the stars, sir?'
  For a while Old Father spoke of the Architects and their
strange technologies, machines that could generate streams of
invisible graviphotons and shoot them into the sun. He talked
about ways to deform the smooth black tissues of
161
 spacetime, to collapse the core of a star into a ball of
plasma so hot and so dense that it instantly rebounded in a
cosmic explosion of light. Danlo, with his hands pressed
together beneath his chin, listened raptly. Then, without
warning, he sprang to his feet and flung his arms upward toward
the night sky. 'Light is faster than a diving goshawk – this I
have learned. Faster than the wind. The light from the
blinkans, from the supernovae that the Architects have made,
this shaida light races across the galaxy, yes? The killing
light. It races, eleven million miles each minute, but ...
relatively, it creeps like a snowworm across the endless ice.
Because the blessed galaxy is so vast. There is a blinkan –
Merripen's Star, it is called. A supernova recently born. Soon,
its light will reach this world, I think, and we will all burn.
Then I and you and everyone will go over.'
 Slowly, painfully, puffing with caution and care, Old Father
stood up. He rested a heavy hand on Danlo's shoulders, and his
black claws clicked together. He pointed at a starless patch of
sky east of Shurablinka. There, glowing circles of light
rippled deep in their changing colours of tangerine and gold.
'Do you see it?' he asked.
 'The Fara Gelastei,' Danlo said. 'The Golden Flower – it has
grown recently, yes?'
 'We call it the Golden Ring. And yes, it has grown. So, it's
so: six years ago, Mallory Ringess becomes a god, and the
Golden Ring mysteriously appears in the heavens. Ah, ah – and
not just in the heavens above our cold world. Above many
worlds, all through the galaxy, there are rings of gold. It's
life, of course! An extension of the biosphere. New life
floating along the currents of space, feeding off light.
Exhaling photoreflective gases. A hundred billion rings of life
– like seeds! – growing. There's hope that these rings will
shield Neverness from the light of the supernovae. Like a
golden umbrella, it will shield us so that minds like yours
might remain alive to ask: When will I be devoured by light?'
Fayeth, who was still sitting on the carpet, let loose a
162
long, low whistle, the kind of disapproving sound that the
Fravashi emit when they have caught one of their students
falling into a belief system. She seemed delighted to point out
Old Father's error, and she said, 'It's not really known if the
Golden Ring will protect us.'
 'Ah, ha, very good, this is true,' Old Father said. 'Not even
the biologists have been able to project the Ring's rate of
growth.'
  'I've heard many people talking of abandoning our planet,'
Fayeth said.
 'Ah, oh, but the light from the supernova won't reach
Neverness for thirteen more years. There's time enough to wait
and see.'
 A bell rang then, the dinner bell summoning them to a
typically simple meal of bread, cheese, and a fruit, probably
fresh snow apples or icy cold Yarkona plums. Old Father and
Fayeth made ready to leave the thinking chamber, but Danlo
remained near its centre, staring up at the sky.
'What do you see?' Old Father asked.
  For a moment, Danlo kept his silence, and then he said, 'The
blessed stars. The ... shaida stars. I never thought that
anything could kill the stars.'
  Soon after this, Danlo began associating himself with a cult
known as the Returnists. This was the newest of the City's
cults, founded by a renegade scryer named Elianora Wen. She was
a remarkable woman who had been born into one of the musical
clans on Yarkona. When she was ten years old, her family
brought her to Neverness, where she had thrilled the
aficionados of Golden Age music with her mastery of the
gosharp, flute, and other instruments. She might have had a
long career as a music master, but she had stunned her family
by renouncing everything to join the Order. She was
strong-willed, thoughtful, provocative, quirky, and possessed
of immaculate sensibilities, and so she had managed to win a
position as a novice at Borja. Eventually, she had blinded
herself and become a scryer, one of the finest, only to quit
the Order at the time of the
163
 Pilots' War. For thirteen years, she had frequented the better
hotels and cafes near the Street of Embassies, drinking
Summerworld coffees and eating kurmash, and making friends with
everyone she could. By the time Danlo came to the City, she
knew ten thousand people by name and twenty thousand more by
the sound of their voices. She became quite popular as a reader
of futures, though she scandalized the traditionalists by
accepting money for her services. It was said that she gave all
her money to the hibakusha hospices, but her fame and influence
was based not on her generosity but upon a series of visions
that had come to her on the 99th night of deep winter of the
preceding year. In her reading of her own future, in a moment
of blinding revelation, she had come at last into her calling,
which was to prepare the people for the god-hood of Mallory
Ringess. This she had done, with all her considerable powers.
The Returnists soon numbered in the hundreds, and they all
believed – and preached – that Mallory Ringess would return to
Neverness. He would save the Order from corruption and
divisiveness, just as he would save the City from the panic
over the coming supernova. It was the glory of the Ringess to
cause the quickening of the Golden Ring, to watch over its
growth, and thus to save the planet from the fury of the Vild.
Someday, according to the Returnists, Mallory Ringess would
stop the stars from exploding and save the universe from its
ultimate fate.
 During the long, sunny days of false winter, Danlo frequented
the cafes along the Old City Glissade, drinking toalache tea
with the Returnists who gathered there each afternoon for
refreshment and conversation. The Returnists were mostly young
Ordermen, joined by a few wealthy farsiders who wore rich
clothes and golden bands around their heads as a token of their
devotion. They liked to talk about the life of Mallory Ringess,
and they liked to speculate as to the changes that a god might
bring to their city. It was their hope that the Ringess would
recognize
164
 them as true seekers and explain to them the mystery of the
Elder Eddas and other secrets that only a god might understand.
One day, while talking with a woman named Sarah Turkmanian and
various of her friends, Danlo learned that Mallory Ringess had
once journeyed to the Alaloi tribe known as the Devaki. Nearly
seventeen years previously, he had made this journey in the
hope of discovering the secret of the Elder Eddas embroidered
into the primitive Alaloi chromosomes. This news astonished
Danlo. He immediately guessed that he was Mallory Ringess' son.
Three-Fingered Soli had told him that his blood father was a
pilot of the City, but he had never suspected that his father
might also be a god. And his mother was surely one of the women
who had accompanied Mallory Ringess on his ill-fated
expedition, perhaps even Katharine the Scryer, and Danlo wanted
to share this astonishing hypothesis with the other Returnists,
but he was unsure if it was really true. Perhaps, he thought,
Three-Fingered Soli had told him a polite lie concerning his
true parentage. Perhaps his mother and father were really
wormrunners, common criminals poaching shagshay furs from
Kweitkel's forests. Perhaps his mother had given birth to him
far from the City, only to abandon him to die on some snowy
ledge near the Devaki cave. It was possible that Haidar and
Chandra had found him and adopted him, and it was very possible
that Soli had told him a false story to spare him the shame of
such an ignoble birth. Because Danlo had a keen desire to learn
the truth about himself – and because he loved hearing any
story told about the mysterious Mallory Ringess – Danlo joined
the Returnists for tea and companionship and wild speculations,
and he sat with them as often as he could.
  It is hard to know what the future of this cult would have
been if Elianora Wen hadn't delivered her famous prophecy of
the 11th of false winter. In the great circle outside the
Hofgarten, she stood serene and grave in her immaculate white
robe and announced to the City that
165
the return of Mallory Ringess was imminent. He would return to
Neverness in nine more days, on 20th night. The wounded
hibakusha in their tenements should rejoice, for Mallory
Ringess would restore them to health. The worm-runners and
other criminals should flee the City or else Mallory Ringess
would judge them and execute them for their crimes. Above all,
she said, the lords and masters of the Order should humble
themselves, for Mallory Ringess would return as Lord of Lords,
and he would remake the Order into an army of spiritual
warriors who would restore the galaxy to its splendour.
 Given the mistrust of people towards scryers and their secret
art, the effect of Elianora's prophecy was somewhat amazing.
Many wormrunners did in fact leave Neverness at this time; not
a few merchants gave all their wealth and worldly possessions
to the hibakusha and went to live together as dedicated
Returnists in the free hostels of the Old City; and most
amazing of all, six lords of the Academy renounced their
positions to protest the political manoeuvring that had so
weakened the Order. At dusk on 20th night, Elianora led nine
hundred women and men of her cult up the lower slopes of Urkel
to await the return of Mallory Ringess. 'He will appear this
night,' Elianora had told everyone. Not only Returnists but
many others came to see if this prophecy proved true. To Danlo,
sitting in a meadow with the other Returnists, it seemed that
half the City had turned out. Before it fell dark and the stars
came out, he counted some eighty thousand people spread out on
Urkel's slopes. From the eastern edge of the Academy down
around to the Hollow Fields, where the hills flattened out just
south of the mountain, they laid out their furs on the snowy
rocks and passed around bottles of toalache or wine. The
Returnists, of course, held a central position slightly higher
than everyone else. Below them the city of Neverness sparkled
with a million lights; above their encampment on the mountain,
the dark icefields and ridgelines gave way to the blackness of
nearspace, and the
166
 sky was brilliant with starlight. Elianora had not said how
Mallory Ringess would return from the stars. Some hoped that he
would fall to earth like a meteor, or even materialize out of
the air and walk among them. But most expected that his famous
lightship, the Immanent Carnation, would appear in the heavens
like a flash of silver and glide down to the waiting runs of
the Hollow Fields. Then Mallory Ringess would climb out of his
ship and ascend the mountain like any other man, though in
truth, no one knew if he would still look like a man. No one
knew what a god was supposed to look like, and so the swarms of
people drank their toalache and talked about the purposes of
evolution, and they waited.
  Danlo waited too, no less excited than any Returnist. Like
the others, he wore a glowing golden band around his head; he
wore his best racing kamelaika, and on his face, he wore the
lively, longing look of one who expected to be touched by the
infinite. He sat not within the first circle of Elianora's
followers, nor even in the second, but on the outer edge of
this group, by a little stream running fast and full with
melted snow. It was a warm, clear night of mountain winds and
ageless dreams, and it would be a short night as false winter
nights always are. But measured by the minds of the manswarm
eager to behold a miracle, the night was long indeed. Danlo lay
back against the cold earth, counting his heartbeats as he
tried to count the thousands of stars burning through the
night. It was a game he liked to play, but a game he could
never win because there were too many stars and the sky never
held still. Always the world turned into the east, turning its
cold face to the deeps of the galaxy and to the greater
universe beyond. Always, above the curve of the eastern
horizon, new lights appeared, the blinkans and the
constellations and the lone, blue giant stars. He lay there
waiting and sometimes dreaming, listening to random bits of
conversation that fell out of the mouths of the people nearby.
All through the night, people made their way up from the City,
and the
167
 crowds around him began to thicken. Near midnight, a few of
the weary ones folded up their furs and abandoned their vigil.
With every hour that passed, the people's mood shifted from
anticipation to grim faith to uneasiness, and then into an
ugly suspicion that somehow they had been fooled. When the
great Swan constellation rose above Urkel's dark ridgeline,
Danlo knew that the sun could not be far behind. He, too, had
begun to doubt Elianora's prophecy – at least he doubted the
wisdom of taking her words literally. He was searching the
tired faces of his fellow Returnists for despair when, one by
one, everyone stopped talking and looked down the narrow,
rocky path that wound up the mountain. For a moment, there was
a vast, unnerving silence, and then someone cried out: 'Look,
it is he!'
  Danlo looked down into the dark path to see a tall figure
making his way across the stunt spruce and the snowfields. Like
everyone else, he hoped that it was Mallory Ringess, but his
eyes were used to looking for animals in dark forests, and he
could see what others could not. Immediately, he recognized
this latecomer as a Fravashi alien, and then moments later,
from the tufts of fur below the ears and his arthritic gait, he
saw that it was Old Father. As Old Father climbed higher up the
path, this sobering fact became apparent to everyone else.
There were many groans of disappointment; this sound broke from
the lips of a thousand people with the suddenness of ice
cracking from a glacier and falling into the sea. As if they
had come to a sudden understanding, people began standing up
and leaving. They brushed past Old Father without a glance, not
even bothering to notice his strange smile or his golden eyes
burning through the darkness. Old Father walked through the
manswarm straight toward the spot where Danlo sat. He greeted
Danlo politely, and then, in his most playful and sadistic
voice, he asked, 'Ho, am I too late?'
  Danlo looked at the sudden flood of people going down the
mountain, and he said, 'Perhaps.'
168
  'Ah, oh, it's nearly dawn. I'd heard that Mallory Ringess
would appear before dawn.'
'The whole city must have heard of Elianora's vision,' Danlo
said.
  'Even we Fravashi,' Old Father said. 'But I wanted to see
for myself.'
  'But, sir, how did you find me here? There are so many
people.'
  Old Father pointed his black claw at the circles of
Returnists still sitting around Elianora Wen. Even as Danlo
did, they all wore templets around their heads, and these nine
hundred luminescent bands cast halos of golden light into the
black air. 'I followed the glow,' Old Father said. 'You can see
it a long way off. And then as I came closer, I followed your
scent. It's unique and quite strong, you know.'
 Danlo bent his head to sniff his clothes, and he said, 'I did
not know the Fravashi had such keen noses.'
 'Ha, ha, you smell like a wolf who has rolled in musk grass.
Have you considered bathing more frequently?'
 'I ... do bathe,' Danlo said. 'I love the water.'
  'Ah, ha, but you haven't bathed since you began dreaming with
the autists, have you?'
'You know about the Dreamers, sir?'
Old Father said nothing but simply smiled at him.
  'Then you must know ... about the Scientists as well?'
'Oh, ho, I do know.'
 'These blessed worldviews,' Danlo said. These ways of
seeing.'
 'Ah, oh, oh, ah,' Old Father said. This is a city of cults,
isn't it?'
   'But I have left the Dreamers,' Danlo said. 'I have left the
Scientists, too.'
'So, it's so.'
   'You taught me, sir. How to free myself from any world
view.'
 169
   'But now you wear the templet and sit with the Returnists?'
   'You are worried that I will become bound to this way ...
because it promises so much, yes?'
   Old Father motioned toward the men and women sitting close
to them, murmuring words of exhausted hope as they looked up at
the sky. 'This cult? Oh, no, no, no – when dawn comes and
Mallory Ringess has failed to return, the Returnists will be no
more. If I seem worried – and I must tell you that it's nearly
impossible for a Fravashi to worry – it's only because you seem
to love all cults too well.'
  With his little finger Danlo touched the glowing templet
tight against his forehead, and he asked, 'But what better way
... to know these ways?'
   'Well, there is the spelad, of course. Someday you may play
this as well as Fayeth. Ah, ho, the whole Fravashi system.'
  'Spelad is a clever game,' Danlo said. 'But it is only a
game.'
'Ah, ah?'
 Danlo held out his hand. In the light of his templet, his
fingernails glowed yellow-orange. He suddenly curled his
fingers toward his palm, making a loose fist. He said, The
Fravashi teach their students to hold any worldview lightly, as
they would a butterfly, yes?'
 'To hold a reality lightly is to change realities easily,'
Old Father said. 'How else may one progress from the simplex to
the higher stages of plexity?'
'But, sir, your students, Fayeth and Luister, the others
- they hold most realities too lightly. They never really know
the realities they hold.'
   'Ho, ho, do you think you understand the beliefs of science
more completely than Fayeth does? And the other belief systems
as well?'
  'No, sir.'
  'Then I'm afraid that I don't understand.'
  There was a half smile on Old Father's face, and Danlo
 170
thought that he was being only half truthful with him.
 'There is a difference,' Danlo said, 'between knowledge and
belief.'
 'Ah ho, aha,' Old Father said.
  Danlo turned to face the east, where the sky showed blue
with the day's first light. It would be some time before the
sun rose, but already the horizon was stained with tones of
ochre and glowing red. Many of the Returnists were looking in
this direction, too. Elianora stood up and somehow oriented
herself toward the coming dawn. Like all scryers she was blind,
and more, her eyepits were scooped hollows as black as space.
Perhaps she was waiting to feel the heat of the sun's rays
against her cheeks. If she was chagrined or shamed that her
prophecy was about to prove false, she gave no sign.
  'Do you see this lovely scryer?' Danlo said. He dropped his
voice to a near-whisper and moved closer to Old Father. 'Before
she blinded herself, she had eyes as I have. As we do. She
could see all the colours of the world. But ... what if she had
been born eyeless, just as she is now. What if she had been
blind from birth, like the hibakusha babies? How could she know
that blood is the reddest of all the reds? How could she see
the colours of the sunrise? When you look at the sky, sir, do
you say, "I believe in blueness"? No, you do not, not unless
you are blind. You see the blessed blue, and so you know it.
Don't you see? We do not need to believe ... that which we
know.'
'Ah, ho, knowing,' Old Father said. 'So, it's so.'
  'Fayeth may understand the beliefs of Science better than
I,' Danlo said. 'But she'll never know Science ... until she
has seen a snowworm sliced into a hundred segments while it is
still alive.'
  'Would you expect me to subject all my students to such
atrocities?'
 'To be truly complex ... yes. The other students play the
spelad, and they think they know what it is like to move from
reality to reality. But it is not really ... real,
171
 to them. When they enter a new worldview ... they are like old
men wading in a hot spring. Half in, half out, never completely
wet or dry.'
  Now the sky was flaming crimson, and the air was lighter,
and the trees and boulders across the mountain were beginning
to take on the colours of morning. Of all the people who had
climbed Urkel during the night, only the Returnists remained.
And now most of these were leaving because their belief in the
return of Mallory Ringess had been broken. This, Danlo thought,
was the essential difference between belief and knowledge.
Knowledge could only intensify into deeper knowledge, whereas
belief was as fragile as glass. Hundreds of red-eyed people
muttered to themselves as they cast betrayed looks at Elianora
and turned their backs to her without bidding her farewell.
They left behind forty-eight men and women who knew something
they did not. Danlo knew it too, but he could hardly explain
this knowledge to Old Father. He knew that, in some sense,
Mallory Ringess had returned to Neverness that night. There had
indeed been a god upon the mountain – Danlo had only to
remember the wistful looks on eighty thousand faces to know
that this was so. Because of Elianora's prophecy, something in
the City had changed, irrevocably, and something new had been
born. Old Father was wrong to suppose that the movement she had
begun would simply evaporate like dew drops under a hot sun.
 Old Father, who was always adept at reading people's thought
shadows, studied Danlo's face, then said, 'You never really
believed Mallory Ringess would return, did you?'
  'I do not want to believe anything,' Danlo said. 'I want to
know ... everything.'
 'Ha, ha, not an insignificant ambition. You're different from
my other students – they merely desire liberation.'
 'And yet they are so ... unfree.'
Old Father's eyes opened wide, and he said, 'How so?'
172
  'Because they think they have found a system ... that will
free them.'
'Haven't they?'
 'The Fravashi system ... is the one reality they hold tightly.
And it holds them even more tightly.'
'Do you have so little respect for our way, then?'
  'Oh, no, sir, I have loved this way very well, it is
only...'
  Old Father waited a moment, then said, 'Please continue.'
 Danlo looked down at the stream bubbling through the trees
nearby. He said, 'The virtue of the Fravashi system is in
freeing us from systems, yes?'
'This is true.'
 'Then shouldn't we use this very system ... to free ourselves
from the Fravashi way?'
 'Ah, ah,' Old Father said as he shut both his eyes. 'Oh, oh,
oh, oh.'
'I must ... free myself from this way,' Danlo said.
'Ohhh!'
'I must leave your house before it is too late.'
'So, then – it's so.'
'I am sorry, sir. You must think me ungrateful.'
  Old Father opened his eyes, and his mouth broke into a
smile. 'No, I've never thought that. A student repays his
master poorly if he always remains a student. I've known for
some time you would leave.'
'To enter the Order, yes?'
 'Ho, ho, even if the Order were to reject you, you still must
leave. All my students leave me when they've learned what
you've learned.'
'I am ... sorry,' Danlo said.
  'Oh, ho, but I'm not sorry,' Old Father said. 'You've
learned well, and you've pleased me well, better than I could
say unless I say it in Fravash.'
  Danlo looked down to see that his fellow Returnists were
beginning to break their encampment, packing up their
173
furs and baskets of food. One of them, a young horologe from
Lara Sig, told Danlo that it was time to hike back to the City.
'Perhaps we should say goodbye now,' Old Father said.
  Danlo glanced at Elianora, standing silently in the snow as
she held her face to the morning sky. The other Returnists
swarmed around her, talking softly, and one of them offered his
arm for the journey back down the mountain.
  'In five more days,' Danlo said, 'I shall begin the
competition. If the Order accepts me, may I still visit you,
sir?'
'No, you may not.'
  Now Danlo froze into silence, and he was scarcely aware of
the other Returnists leaving him behind.
 'These are not my rules, Danlo. The Order has its own way. No
novice or journeyman may sit with a Fravashi. We're no longer
trusted – I'm sorry.'
'Then– '
'Then you may visit me after you've become a full pilot.'
'But that will be years!'
'Then we must be patient.'
'Of course,' Danlo said, 'I might fail the competition.'
 'That's possible,' Old Father said. 'But the real danger to
you is in succeeding, not failing. Most people love the Order
too completely and find it impossible to leave once they've
entered it.'
  'But they haven't been students of a Fravashi Old Father, I
think.'
'No, that's true.'
  'I must know what it is to be a pilot,' Danlo said. 'A
blessed pilot.'
  'Ho, ho, it's said that the pilots know the strangest
reality of all.'
 Danlo smiled, then, and bowed to Old Father. 'I must thank
you for everything you've given me, sir. The Moksha language,
the ideals of ahimsa and shih. And your kindness. And my
shakuhachi. These are splendid gifts.'
174
 'You're welcome, indeed.' Old Father looked down the path
where the last of the Returnists were disappearing into the
forest. He said, 'Will you walk back to the City with me?'
 'No,' Danlo said. 'I think I will stay and watch the sun
rise.'
'Ah, ho, I'm going home to bed, then.'
'Goodbye, sir.'
'Goodbye, Danlo the Wild. I'll see you soon.'
  Old Father reached over to touch Danlo's head, and then he
turned to walk home. It took him a long time to make his way
down the mountain, and Danlo watched him as long as he could.
At last, when he was alone with the wind and the loons singing
their morning song, he faced east to wait for the sun. In
truth, although he never told this to anyone, he was still
waiting for Mallory Ringess. It was possible that this god was
only late, after all, and Danlo thought that somebody should
remain to greet him if he returned.
175



PART TWO

Borja




CHAPTER SIX

The Culling

 The starting point of Architect – or Edic – understanding is
the recognition that God is created after the image of man.
idea views man and God as joined with one another through a
mysterious connection. Man, out of hubris, wanted an image
formed of himself as a perfected and potentially infinite
God. In that man is reflected in God, he makes himself a
partner in this self-realization. Man and God belong so
closely to one another that one can say that they are
intended for each other. Man finds his fulfilment in God.
 – Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1,754th Edition, Tenth Revised
                                        Standard Version



On the twenty-fifth day of false winter, in the year 2947 since
the founding of the Order, the annual Festival of the
Unfortunate Petitioners was held at Borja College. This is the
first of the Order's colleges, and it occupies much of the
Academy, which is really a separate city within the city of
Neverness. At the very eastern edge of Neverness, pushed up
against the mountains, is a square mile of dormitories, towers,
halls and narrow red glidderies crisscrossing the well-tended
grounds. A high granite wall (it is called the Wounded Wall
because part of its southern face was once destroyed by the
blast of a hydrogen bomb) surrounds the Academy on three sides:
it separates the Academy's spacious buildings from the densely
arrayed spires and apartments of the Old City. There is no wall
along the eastern grounds of the Academy. Or rather, the
mountains, Urkel and Attakel, rise up so steeply as to form
179
 a beautiful, natural wall of ice and rock. Some students rail
at such enforced isolation from the dirty, more organic city
life, but most others find comfort in the company of like
minds rather than loneliness or alienation or despair.
 On this crisp, clear morning, at dawn, Danlo skated through
the city streets until he came to the Wounded Wall. There,
outside the wall's West Gate, on a narrow red gliddery, he
waited with the other petitioners who had come to enter the
Academy. Danlo was one of the first to arrive, but in little
time, as the sun filled the sky, thousands of girls and boys
(and quite a few of their parents) from most of the Civilized
Worlds began lining up behind him. For blocks in any direction,
the side streets giving onto the Wounded Wall overflowed with
would-be students wearing parkas, kimonos, ponchos, fur gowns,
chukkas, sweaters, babris, cowl jackets and kamelaikas,
garments of every conceivable cut and material. Many of the
petitioners were impatient; they grumbled and muttered
obscenities as they queued up, waiting for the great iron gates
to open.
 'We're early,' someone behind Danlo said. 'But you'd think
they would let us come in out of the cold.'
 Danlo examined the wall surrounding the Academy. It was as
high as three tall men, and it was seamed with cracks and
covered with sheets of greyish lichen. He had always loved
climbing rocks, so he wondered if he could find a handhold in
the cut blocks and pull himself up and over. Why, he wondered,
would anyone want to build a wall inside a city?
 'It's cold on this damn world – my tutors never told me it
would be so cold.'
  At last the gates opened inward, and the petitioners slowly
filed onto one of the main glidderies cutting through the
Academy. Behind Danlo there was much grumbling and shouting,
pushing and shoving, especially at those intersections where it
was not clear how the lines should merge. In several places,
fights broke out. Most of these
180
fights were short, clumsy affairs of cursing, flailing fists
and hurried apologies when the combatants were pulled apart.
Inside the gate, however, there was order. Scores of Borja
novices, in their official, white robes, quickly separated the
girls from the boys and led them in groups to various buildings
around the Academy.
 Danlo – along with two thousand other boys – was led across
the high professional's college, Lara Sig, to a large
hemispherical structure called the Ice Dome. Inside the Ice
Dome were figure rings, sled courts, and icefields on which was
played that murderously fast game known as hokkee. That
morning, however, the icefields were empty of skaters; for
hundreds of yards across the icefields, beneath the curving,
triangular panes of the dome, the novices had stacked many
bundles of worn white robes. Next to each bundle was a heap of
sandals of varying sizes. The sandals were paired, left foot to
right, tied together around the toe thongs with a single white
ribbon. Danlo smelled old wool and the rancid thickness of
leather stained with human sweat. One of the elder novices – he
was actually the Head Novice, Sahale Featherstone, a tall boy
with a shaved head and a serious face – directed Danlo and the
others each to choose a robe and a pair of sandals. 'Listen,
now, listen,' the novice said to a group of boys standing
nearby. 'You must remove all your clothes and put on the
petitioner's robe.'
  'But it's too damn cold in here!' an unhappy boy next to
Danlo protested. 'Are we supposed to stand barefoot on ice
while we rummage through a bunch of stinking old shoes? Our
damned feet will freeze!'
  The Head Novice ignored him, as did most of the other boys;
at least, they did not pay him obvious attention. Few were
pleased at having to strip naked in such a chill, open place,
but neither did most of them want to be singled out as
complainers. The boys did as they were told. The air was
suddenly full of sound: zippers being pulled open, the swish of
woven fabrics, clacking skates, and the buzz of a
181
thousand voices. It was cold enough inside the Dome to steam
the breath; everywhere Danlo looked, puffs of silvery vapour
escaped from trembling lips and vanished into the air. Novices
went among the naked boys, collecting clothes and skates and
giving each of them a number in return. 'Your number is 729,'
a pimply novice said as he wrapped Danlo's jacket around his
skates and tied the bundle together. 'You must remember this
number to reclaim your clothes after the competition,' he
didn't explain that new clothes would be given to those few
who were admitted to Borja. Plainly, he did not expect Danlo
to be among the chosen.
  Soon, all the boys were naked, and many were shivering,
their brown or white or black skins stippled with goose bumps.
The ice around the stacks of robes was crowded, but even so,
each of the boys took care to keep a space around himself and
not brush against any of his fellow petitioners. As they
waited their turns at the stacks, they furtively glanced from
body to naked body, comparing and reflecting, silently
judging.
'Hurry, please, I'm freezing to death!'
  This came from a plump boy who had his arms clapped across
his chest. He had dark brown skin the colour of coffee, and his
eyes were full of fear; alternately, he lifted one knee high
and then the other, up and down, touching the ice with his
tender-soled feet as quickly and as briefly as possible. He
looked silly and pathetic, like a strange insect dancing atop a
blister of hot, shiny oil.
'Please hurry!'
 Ahead of Danlo was a frenzy of boys ripping through robes and
sizing sandals to their feet. Everywhere, cast-off white
ribbons from the sandals carpeted the ice. Danlo found that by
kicking some of the ribbons together he could stand on them and
not feel the ilka-hara, the burn of naked ice against flesh. He
stood clutching his bamboo shakuhachi in his hand, patiently
waiting his turn, watching and waiting, and all the while he
was aware that many
182
 of the boys were watching him, too. They stared at his loins,
at the membrum that Three-Fingered Soli had cut and marked with
coloured scars. This unique mutilation riveted their stares.
And Danlo stared at the other boys, or rather, he quickly
surveyed the contours of the smooth, civilized bodies all
around him. None of the boys had been cut; they each retained
foreskins sheathing the bulbs of their membrums, and thus they
were truly boys, not men. Some of the boys had yet to begin
their growth; their chests were slight and narrow, and their
membrums were almost as small as Danlo's little finger. But
even the older boys, with their large, fully developed
membrums, were uncut. Despite his training in the perils of
glavering, he could not take them as equals. (In truth, he
worried at his own manhood, for how could he ever become a full
man until he completed his passage and listened to the complete
and whole Song of Life?) No, he was very different from all the
others, and he was at once ashamed and proud of this
difference. No one else seemed quite so tall, or as tough and
hardy in the body. He stood calm and waiting, fairly inured to
the cold. He was still too lean from his starvation the
previous year; the sinews and bones stood out beneath his
weathered skin, and long flat bands of muscle quivered with
every breath taken and released. Most of the boys were
weak-looking, as thin and white as snowworms or layered with
fat like seals. Even the few athletes among them, with their
carefully cultivated physiques, seemed pampered and soft. They
looked at him – at the various parts of his body – with a
mixture of horror, envy, and awe.
 There was one other boy, however, who also stood out from the
others, though mostly for different reasons. As Danlo donned a
loose, scratchy wool robe and kicked on a pair of sandals, he
overheard this boy talking about Ede the God and the
Cybernetic Universal Church, a subject that interested him
endlessly. He slipped through the crowded icefield until he
came upon a short, thin boy who
183
 held the attention of others standing around him. 'Of course,
all the Cybernetic Churches worship Ede as God,' the boy was
saying. 'But it's the Architects of the original church who
have created the Vild.'
  In a low voice Danlo said a prayer, then whispered,
'Shantih, shantih.'
 The boy – his name was Hanuman li Tosh – must have overheard
what Danlo said, for he turned and bowed his head politely. He
had the oldest young face imaginable, smooth like new white ice
and indecently unmarked even for a fifteen-year-old. At the
same time, he seemed strangely jaded, as if he'd lived a
thousand times before, and each life full of disappointments,
boredom, anguish, madness, and desperate love. With his full,
sensual lips, he smiled at Danlo; it was a beautiful smile, at
once shy and compelling. In many ways, he was a beautiful boy.
There was a delicateness to his finely-made face bones, an
almost otherworldly grace. Danlo thought he must be either half
an angel or half demon. His hair was yellow-white, the colour
of an iceblink, and his skin was so white that it was almost
translucent, a thin shell of flesh that could scarcely protect
him from the coldness and cruelties of the world. Except for
his eyes, he was really too beautiful. His eyes were a pale
blue, vivid and clear like those of a sled dog. Danlo had never
imagined seeing such eyes in a human being. There was too much
sensitivity and suffering there, as well as passion and fury.
In truth, Danlo instantly hated the sight of those hellish,
shaida eyes. He thought of this strange boy as the 'Hell-eyes',
a pale fury he should either flee from immediately or kill.
 But the circle of chattering boys surrounding Hanuman pressed
close and caught Danlo up in civilized conversation; he was
caught, too, by Hanuman's silver tongue and his charm.
  'I'm Hanuman li Tosh, off Catava. What does this word
"shantih" mean? It's a beautiful word, and the way you say it –
beautiful and haunting.'
184
  How could Danlo explain the peace beyond peace to a
civilized boy with eyes out of his deepest nightmares? Hanuman
was shivering in his sandals and his robe, looking at him
expectantly. Despite the seeming frailty of his long neck and
naked limbs where they stuck out of his robe, he bore the cold
well. There was something about him that the other boys lacked,
some inner fire or intensity of purpose. He had his fist up to
his mouth coughing at the cold air, but even in his pain, he
seemed very determined and very aware of Danlo looking at him.
  'Shantih,' Danlo said, 'is a word ... my father taught me.
It is really the formal ending to a prayer.'
'And what language would that be? What religion?'
  Danlo had been warned not to reveal his past so he evaded
the question. 'I have not presented myself,' he said. 'I am
Danlo,' he bowed his head and smiled.
'Just ... Danlo?'
  He didn't want to tell him that he was Danlo, son of Haidar,
whose father was Wicent, the son of Nuri the Bear-killer. He
felt the other boys staring at him, whispering, and he blurted
out, They call me Danlo the Wild.'
  Behind Hanuman, a muscle-fat boy with a cracking voice and a
pugnacious face began to laugh. His name was Konrad and he
called out, 'Danlo the Wild – what kind of name is that?'
  And someone else said, 'Danlo the Wild, the nameless child.'
 Danlo's neck suddenly hurt and his eyes were burning with
shame. He stood there breathing deeply and evenly, as Haidar
had taught him, letting the cold air enter his lungs to steal
the heat from his anger. A few of the boys laughed at him and
made jokes about his strange name. Most, however, hung back
and kept their silence, obviously doubting the wisdom of
baiting such a tough-looking boy. With a feather stuck in his
hair and his deep blue eyes, Danlo did in fact look
uncivilized and not a little wild.
Hanuman coughed some more, great racking coughs
185
 that tore through his chest and brought tears to his eyes.
When he had caught his breath, he asked, 'Which is your birth
world?'
'I was born here.'
  'You were? In Neverness? Then you must be used to the cold.'
  Danlo rubbed his arms and blew on his fingers to warm them.
A man, he thought, should not complain about things he can't
change, so he said, simply, 'Can one ever get used to the
cold?'
  'I certainly can't,' Hanuman said as he began coughing
again. And then, 'So cold – how do you stand it?'
  Danlo watched him cough for a while, and said, 'You are ill,
yes?'
 'Ill? No, I'm not – it's just that the air is so cold it cuts
the lungs.'
 After another round of coughing, Danlo decided that Hanuman
was very ill. Once, when he was a young boy, he had watched his
near-brother, Basham, die of a lung fever. Hanuman certainly
had the pale, haunted look of someone who was contemplating
going over. Perhaps a virus was eating away at his lungs. He
seemed to be burning from deep inside. His eyes were sunken
into dark, bruised flesh; the contrast of the light blue irises
against the dark hollows made them seem more hellish by the
moment. There was a fear in his eyes, a frightened, fey look
almost as if he could see his fate approaching like a dark
storm that would ice his heart and steal his breath away. He
coughed again, and Danlo could almost feel the spasm tearing
through his own chest. He was afraid for Hanuman. He was
afraid, and that was seemly, for a man to fear another's dying,
but of course it was very wrong that Hanuman should be afraid
for himself. Hanuman's fear made Danlo sick. He had keen eyes,
and he could see that this frail, ill boy was trying to hide
his fear from all the others, perhaps even trying to hide it
from himself. Someone, he thought, should feed him bowls of
wolf-root tea and bathe his head with cool
186
water. Where was his mother, to care for him? He would have
placed his hand on Hanuman's burning forehead to touch the
fever away, but he remembered that he was not supposed to touch
others, especially not strangers, especially not in sight of a
hundred other laughing, joking boys.
 Hanuman moved closer to Danlo and spoke in a low, tortured
voice, 'Please don't tell the novices or masters I'm ill.'
 He coughed so hard that he doubled over and lost his balance
as his foot slipped on the ice. He would have pitched face
forward, but Danlo caught him by the armpit and hand. Hanuman's
hand was hot like an oilstone and surprisingly strong. (Later
Danlo would learn that Hanuman had trained in the killing arts
in order to harden himself. In truth, he was much stronger than
he looked.) Danlo gripped Hanuman's hard little hand, pulling
him to his feet, and suddenly they didn't seem at all like
strangers. There was something between them, some kind of
correspondence and immediate understanding. Danlo had a feeling
that he should pay close attention to this correspondence.
Hanuman's intenseness both attracted and repelled him. He
smelled Hanuman's fear and sensed his will to suffer that fear
in silence no matter the cost. He smelled other things as well.
Hanuman stank of sweat and sickness, and of coffee – obviously
he had been drinking mugs of coffee to keep himself awake. With
tired, feverish eyes Hanuman looked at Danlo as if they shared
a secret. Hanuman shook off his hand, gathered in his pride and
stood alone. Danlo thought he was being consumed from within
like an overfilled oilstone burning too quickly. Who could hold
such inner fire, he wondered, and not quickly go over to the
other side of day?
 'You should rest in your furs and drink hot tea,' Danlo said,
'or else you might go over.'
  'Go over? Do you mean die?' Hanuman spoke this word as if it
were the most odious and terrifying concept that he could
imagine. 'Please, no, I hope not.'
187
 He coughed and there was a bubbly sound of liquid breaking
deep in his throat.
  'Where are your parents?' Danlo asked as he combed back his
long hair with his fingers. 'Did you make the journey here
alone?'
 Hanuman coughed into his cupped hand, then wiped a fleck of
blood from his lips. 'I don't have any parents.'
  'No father, no mother? O blessed God, how can you not have a
mother?'
 'Oh, I had parents, once,' Hanuman explained. 'I'm not a
slelnik, even though some people say I look like one.'
 Danlo hadn't yet heard of the despised, unnatural breeding
strategies practised on a few of the Civilized Worlds; he knew
nothing of the exemplars and slelniks born in abomination from
the artificial wombs. He thought he understood a part of
Hanuman's pain and obvious loneliness; however, he understood
wrongly. 'Your parents have gone over, yes?'
  Hanuman looked down at the ice and then shook his head.
'Does it matter?' he asked. To them, I might as well be dead.'
 He told Danlo something of his journey to Neverness, then. In
the Ice Dome, a thousand boys were stamping their feet,
slapping leather sandals against ice as they huffed out steam
and complained of neglect, and Hanuman told of how he had been
born into an important Architect family on Catava. His parents
were Pavel and Moriah li Tosh, readers in the Cybernetic
Reformed Church. (Over the millennia, the Architects of the
Infinite Intelligence of the Cybernetic Universal Church have
been riven into many different sub-religions. The Evolutionary
Church of Ede, the Cybernetic Orthodox Churches, the Fostora
Separatist Union – these are but a few of the hundreds of
churches which have splintered off from the original church
body, beginning with the Ianthian Heresy and the First Schism
in the year 331 EV, that is to say, the 331st year since the
vastening of Nikolos Daru Ede. All
188
time, the Architects say, must begin at the moment Ede carked
his consciousness into one of his mainbrain computers and thus
became the first of humanity's gods.) Like his parents, Hanuman
had undergone the traditional reader training in one of the
church schools. Unlike any of the respectable Architects that
he knew, however, he had rebelled while still very young,
begging his parents' permission to attend the Order's elite
school in Oloruning, which is Catava's largest and only real
city.
 'My father allowed me to enter the elite school,' Hanuman
said, 'only because it was the best school on Catava. But I had
to agree to finish my reader training in the church after
graduation; I had to agree not to attend the Academy on
Neverness. So I agreed. But it was an impossible agreement. I
never should have made it. All my friends in the elite school
were planning to enter the Academy, if they could. And I'd
always hoped to enter the Academy. To become a reader like my
parents and grandparents – I never really wanted that. Oh, wait
... please excuse my coughing. Do you know about the readers of
my church? Of my parents' church? No? I'm not supposed to tell
anyone this, but I shall anyway. The second holiest ceremony in
our church is the facing ceremony. You'll have heard rumours
about the facing ceremony – almost everyone has. No? Where have
you spent your life? Well, in the facing ceremony, any Worthy
Architect is allowed to interface with one of the church's
communal computers. The interfacing, entering into computer
consciousness, the information flows, like lightning, the
power. It's like heaven, really, the only good thing about
being an Architect. But before every facing ceremony, there has
to be a cleansing. Of sin. We Architects ... the Architects,
call sin "negative programming". So before a facing, a
cleansing, because it's blasphemy to interface a holy computer
while unclean with negative programs – that's what most of the
Cybernetic Churches teach. I can't tell you about the cleansing
ceremony. It's worse than hateful, really, it's a
189
 violation of the soul. Oh, I'll tell you, if you promise to
keep this secret. The readers strip bare your mind with their
akashic computers. Everything, every negative thought or
intention, especially vanity, because that's the worst thing,
the damning sin, to think too highly of yourself or want to be
more than you were born for. Almost everything – there are
ways of hiding things; you have to learn to keep your thoughts
secret or else the readers will rape your soul. They'll
cleanse you until there's nothing left. Have you ever had an
imprinting? The cleansing is like a reverse imprinting. The
readers remove the bad memories. They reprogram the brain ...
by killing parts of it. Not everyone believes that, of course,
or else they'd panic whenever it was time for a cleansing. But
even if the readers don't actually kill the brain cells, they
kill something else when they eliminate old synaptic pathways
and create new ones. Why not call it soul? I know that's an
inelegant word for an elegant, inexpressible concept, but soul
... you have to keep your soul to yourself, do you see? The
soul, the light. And that's why I left my church. Because I'd
rather have died than become a reader.'
 In silence Danlo listened as this intense, ill boy talked and
coughed. That he talked so much and so freely surprised him.
Danlo was beginning to discover a talent for listening to
others and winning their trust. He listened deeply, as he would
listen to the west wind scrape across and articulate the ice
forms of the sea. He liked the way Hanuman used words, the
richness and clarity of his thought. It was a rare thing, he
knew, for a boy to speak as fluently as a skilful-tongued man.
 'I wonder what it would be like ... to touch minds with a
computer,' Danlo said.
'You've never faced a computer?'
'No.'
'Well, it's pure ecstasy,' Hanuman said.
 Danlo touched the feather dangling from his hair, and then he
touched his forehead. 'You know about computers
190
  – are computers truly alive? Life, consciousness is ... even
the smallest living things, even the snowworms are conscious.'
Isa snowworm conscious?' Hanuman asked.
  'Yes,' Danlo said. 'I am not a shaman so I have never
entered into snowworm consciousness. But Yuri the Wise and
others of my ... other men that I have known have entered the
consciousness of the animals, and they know what it is like to
be a snowworm.'
'And what is it like?'
  'It is like something. It is like being a snowflake in a
blizzard. It is like the beginning of drawing in a breath of
new air. It is like... I do not know. Perhaps someday I will
become a snowworm and I will tell you.'
 Hanuman smiled as he began to cough. Then he said, 'You're
very strange, did you know that?'
 'Thank you,' Danlo said, returning his smile. 'You are
strange too.'
'Oh, yes, strange – I think I was born that way.'
  'And your parents?' Danlo asked. They had no sympathy ...
for this strangeness?'
  Hanuman was silent for a few moments as he stared down at
the steaming ice. As if he had come to a grave decision, he
nodded his head. He looked up suddenly and then told Danlo the
rest of his story. The Cybernetic Reformed Churches, Hanuman
said, did not believe in the freedom of the soul. And so,
hating the life-perverting ethos and practices of his church,
Hanuman had made secret plans to journey to Neverness after his
graduation. That he would be accepted to the Academy, he felt
certain, for all his life he had studied the disciplines with a
frenzy, and he had risen to the zenith of the ranks of the
chosen. But, it was said, the greater the height, the farther
the drop, and so one of his friends, out of envy and spite, had
betrayed him to his father just before their graduation. His
father had immediately removed him from the school. He never
graduated. He was locked inside the reading room
191
 of his family's church, there to familiarize himself with the
heaumes of the akashic computers, with the Edic lights of the
altar, and with the burning incense and brain musics used in
Architect ceremonies. His father told him to meditate on the
Book of God. He was to give special attention to its sub-books:
The Life Of Ede, Facings, and Iterations. In Facings, a body of
so-called wisdom revealed to Kostos Olorun long after Ede had
become a god, he came across the crucial passage: And so Ede
faced the universe, and he was vastened, and he saw that the
face of God was his own. Then the would-be-gods, who are the
hakra devils of the darkest depths of space, from the farthest
reaches of time, saw what Ede had done, and they were jealous.
And so they turned their eyes godward in jealousy and lust for
the infinite lights, but in their countenances God read hubris,
and he struck them blind. For here is the oldest of teachings,
here is wisdom: No god is there but God; God is one, and there
can be only one God.
  What followed, in this holy book of Facings, were many
chapters describing the detection and cleansing of hakras. For
the thousandth time in his life, Hanuman reflected on his
church's doctrine that all human beings were considered – and
condemned – as potential hakras, potential gods. What kind of
hateful, corrupt church, he wondered, would deny the divinity
within each human being? He decided that Kostos Olorun, three
thousand years ago, in his ambition to validate the authority
of the nascent church and to establish himself as 'God's
Prophet', had lied about receiving revelations from Ede, and
more, that he had invented many false doctrines. While Hanuman
waited for his father to cleanse him of his sins, he had a
dangerous thought: The true meaning of Ede's vastening was that
each man, woman, and child should come to apprehend the god
within. Every man and woman is a star – Ede himself had written
these words in his Universals. But somehow his church had
corrupted and perverted this beautiful image to
192
 mean that every woman and man is a star whose light must be
extinguished periodically lest it outshine that of Ede the
God. Perhaps, Hanuman mused, human beings truly were as
angels, or rather, as godlings who might grow into infinity,
and someday, at the end of time, be united with Ede and all
the other gods of the universe.
  Unwittingly, Hanuman had come to formulate one of the oldest
and most secret heresies of his church: the Major Hakra Heresy.
One day, in front of the reading room's altar, as he watched
the jewelled, Edic lights shimmering up through the spectrum
from red to violet, he voiced this heresy to his father. His
father, who was a stern, handsome man, was scandalized by his
son's ideas. He told him to immediately prepare himself for a
deep cleansing. There was hatred in his father's voice,
jealousy and loathing. Although Hanuman had been cleansed many
times, he had never had a deep cleansing. Against the power and
subtleties of the holy computers as they cleansed him deeply,
the little mind tricks he had learned would be useless; a deep
cleansing would disfigure his soul as surely as a hot wind
melts the features of an ice sculpture. He closed his eyes to
look upon the familiar, very mortal face of his soul, and he
was terrified. He begged his father to relent, to subject him
only to the usual, mundane cleansing. But his father was a hard
man. His father, this prince of the church, hardened his heart
and reviled his son as a hakra; he would not relent. His father
told him to kneel beneath the heaume of the holy, cleansing
computer. But instead, in his terror and pride, in a blind
panic, Hanuman swept up the gold incense stand and struck his
father's forehead. It was a quick, powerful, desperate blow;
his father immediately fell dying across the altar. Hanuman
gasped to see the rainbow of Edic lights falling over his
father's open brains. He wept uncontrollably as long as he
dared, and then he tore the Edic lights from the altar and left
his father in a pool of blood. He fled to Oloruning. There he
sold the priceless lights to a wormrunner. He used the
193
 money to buy a passage on a harijan prayership, where one of
the filthy pilgrims infected him with a lung disease. Thus he
had come to Neverness, ill in his body and burning in his
soul; he had come to the City of Pain hoping to enter the
Academy and forget his sinful past.
  Part of this story, of course – the sad, murderous part –
Danlo did not learn until years later. For good reason,
Hanuman was a secretive boy, and he would grow to be a
secretive man. It was a mark of his unusual trust in Danlo
that he had told him as much as he had. 'I've given up
everything to enter the Academy,' he said to Danlo. 'My whole
life.'
 He coughed for a long time, and Danlo listened to the ragged,
ripping sound. The huge Dome was full of sound: wind breaking
against the clary panes high above, chattering teeth, and two
thousand shivering boys grumbling and wondering how long they
would be made to wait in such a frigid place. Then a deep voice
called out, 'Silence, it's time!' The Head Novice, with a look
of command written over his narrow face, quickly made his way
to the centre of the Ice Dome. 'Silence, it's time for the
first test. Form a queue at the nearest doorway; a novice will
lead you to your first test. Silence! Once the test begins,
anyone caught talking will be dismissed.'
  Danlo looked at Hanuman and whispered, 'I wish you well.'
'I wish you well, Danlo the Wild.'
  They began their walk across Borja, then. Boys and girls
clad in thin white robes issued forth from many of the
buildings. That year, some seven thousand petitions to compete
in the festival had been accepted; long lines of would-be
novices filled the glidderies. The sun was now high in the
southern sky, and everywhere the spires were awash in the hot,
false winter light. It was much warmer than it had been inside
the Ice Dome. A film of water mirrored the red ice of the
lesser glidderies. It was so slippery that some of the
petitioners linked arms and pro-
194
ceeded very carefully. Others hurried recklessly along in
sudden bursts of speed, using their flat leather sandals to
skid and hydroplane across the ice. Danlo stayed near Hanuman,
waiting for him to slip and fall at any moment. But Hanuman
kept his balance, even as they made their way toward the
Tycho's Spire. Above them – above the dormitories and lesser
buildings – this giant needle marked the very centre of Borja.
Danlo liked the feeling of the novices' college; it was a place
of beauty that had taken centuries to evolve and unfold. On
most of the buildings, variegated lichens burned across the
stonework in lovely rosettes of ochre, orange, and red. Many
old yu trees had grown almost as high as the spires themselves.
It was impossible to stand on any lawn of the Academy and not
hear the kap, kap, kap, of mauli birds pecking at bark. The
smooth, immaculate glidderies, the fireflowers, the snow loons
hunting yu berries in the snow – here, Danlo thought, was a
place touched by the arts of mankind, and perhaps steeped in
the unutterable essence of halla.
 Beneath the Tycho's Tower, surrounded by eight buildings
which house the various computers used in the novices'
education, is the beloved Lavi Square. That is to say, it is
beloved by the novices who gather there to gossip and greet new
friends, and to enjoy a few moments (or hours) of open sky. The
petitioners rarely come to love Lavi Square. Every year, the
Test of Patience is held there. This is the first test of the
Festival of Unfortunate Petitioners, and every year it takes a
different form. Every year, the Master of Novices delights in
designing trials to cull the most patient of petitioners.
Sometimes the unfortunate boys and girls are made to recite
poetry until their voices are hoarse, and the weak among them
beg to be allowed surcease from the torment of speaking; one
time, ten years before, they were required to stay awake and
attentive while an historian lectured about the manifold
horrors of the Fifth Mentality and the Second Dark Age. Only
those few boys and girls who had remained awake after three
195
 days had been allowed to take the second test. Along with
Hanuman – and seven thousand other boys and girls – Danlo was
herded into the Square. For a hundred and fifty yards along the
length and breadth of the Square, seven thousand straw mats
were laid out in a neat array. Each mat was a rectangle three
feet wide and four feet long. The mats were jammed close
together, their frayed edges separated by only a few inches of
white ice. A novice bade the petitioners each to kneel on a
mat. Danlo took his place on a mat next to Hanuman. The sharp,
ragged ends of the straw pricked his knees, and the mat was so
worn and full of holes that the wet ice beneath bathed him with
waves of cold.
'Silence, it's time!' the Head Novice cried out again.
  The petitioners fell silent as they looked up expectantly,
eager to learn the nature of that year's test. Except for a
few yu trees laden with red fruit and some ice sculptures (and
twelve precious shih trees from Simoom), the Square was
entirely stived with row upon row of nervous girls and boys.
Danlo smelled clean, childish sweat and the ferment of
overripe berries. From the buildings towering over them came
the plip, plip of melting icicles. There was anxiety in the
air, a chill intensity of anticipation.
 'Silence, it's time to present the Master of Novices,
Pesheval Lal!'
 From the building behind the novice, an ugly, bearded man
emerged from the doorway and made his way down a flight of
steps. His birth name was Pesheval Lal, and the novices and
journeymen called him 'Master Lal', but everywhere else he was
famous simply as 'Bardo'. (Or, as 'Bardo the Just'.) Bardo's
formal black robe was tight across his immense chest and
belly. White is the colour of Borja, and all novices wear
white, but Bardo the Just had been a pilot before assuming the
office of Master of Novices; like the other pilots he was
properly dressed, in colour. 'Yes, silence!' his voice boomed
out, echoing the novice's injunction. He was a huge man, and
he had a
196
 huge voice. He sternly looked from petitioner to petitioner.
He had cunning, superb eyes that didn't miss very much when it
came to judging human character. Occasionally he would favour
one of the petitioners with a smile and a slight head bow. He
strolled about with a ponderous, heavy gait, as if he were
hugely bored with himself and the impromptu judgements he had
to make.
  'Silence!' he shouted, and his voice vibrated from building
to building across the Square. 'You'll be silent while I
explain the rules of this year's test. The rules are simple. No
one will be allowed off his mat except to relieve himself. Ah
... or herself. There will be no eating or drinking. Anyone
caught talking will be immediately dismissed. Anything not
forbidden is permitted. It's a simple test, by God! You're here
to wait.'
  And so they waited. Seven thousand children, not one of whom
was older than fifteen years, waited in the warmth of the false
winter sun. Mostly they waited in silence. Hanuman, of course,
couldn't help coughing, but none of the officious novices
patrolling up and down the rows of petitioners seemed to bear
him any ill feelings. Danlo listened to this coughing, and he
worried how Hanuman would stand the bite of the evening air. He
thought to distract Hanuman's ailing spirit with a little
music, to take him out of himself. He removed the shakuhachi
from beneath his robe and began to play. The low, breathy
melody he composed caught the attention of everyone around him.
Most of the petitioners seemed to enjoy the music; the novices,
though, were not pleased. They shot Danlo poisonous looks, as
if they were insulted that he had found a clever way around
Bardo's injunction to silence. To be sure, he was not talking,
but in many ways the music he made was a purer communication
than mere words.
  In this manner, kneeling on his straw mat, blowing
continuously down his long bamboo flute, Danlo whiled away the
endless afternoon. It was a beautiful day, really, a day
197
of warmth and pungent air wafting down from the mountains. The
shih trees beneath the buildings were snowy with white
blossoms, and clouds of newly hatched fritillaries sipped
nectar and filled the air with an explosion of bright violet
wings. It wasn't hard for him to wait, with the sun burning
hot against the clear sky. A million needles of light stung
his neck and face. He closed his eyes and played on and on,
taking little notice of the sun as it grew large and crimson
in the west. When twilight fell, the first chill of evening
stole over the petitioners, but he was still warm and fluid
inside with the music of dreamtime. Then the stars came out,
and it was cold. The cold touched him, gently at first, and
then more urgently. He opened his eyes to darkness and cold
air. There, above the City's eastern edge, the sky was almost
clear of light pollution; the sky was black and full of stars.
In unseen waves, heat escaped the City and radiated upward
into the sky. There were no clouds or moisture in the air to
hold in the heat.
'It's cold! I can't stand this cold!'
  Danlo noticed the boy named Konrad sitting ten yards in
front of him, sitting and cursing as he beat his legs to keep
warm. A cadre of novices converged on him and grasped his robe.
'Your face!' Konrad shouted. 'Your rotting face!' But the
novices took no notice of his bad manners or profanity; they
immediately escorted him from the Square.
 If Konrad was the first to forget his patience and hope, he
was not the last. As if a signal had been given, children in
ones and twos began standing and leaving the Square. And then
groups of ten or a hundred gave up en masse, abandoning their
fellows, and so abandoned their quest to enter the Order. By
the time night had grown full and deep, only some three
thousand petitioners remained.
  Just before midnight, a wicked round of coughing alerted
Danlo as to the gravity of Hanuman's illness. It wasn't very
cold – at least it was no colder than the interior of a snow
hut – but Hanuman was shivering as he coughed,
198
 bent low with his face pressing his mat, shivering beyond
control. If he didn't give up and seek shelter soon he would
surely die. But Hanuman didn't look as if he were ready to give
up. The hard straw had cut parallel marks into his forehead and
cheek; his eyes were open to the light of the flame globes
shining at the edge of the Square. Such eyes he had, a pale
blue burning as the hellish blinkans in the sky burned,
strangely and with terrible intensity. Something terrible and
beautiful inside Hanuman was holding him to his mat, keeping
him coughing in the cold. Danlo could almost see this thing,
this pure, luminous will of Hanuman's beyond even the will to
life. Each man and woman is a star, he remembered, and
something brilliant and beautiful about Hanuman's spirit
attracted him, just as a fritillary is compelled to seek a
woodfire's fatal light.
  'Hanuman!' he whispered. He couldn't help himself. The urge
to speak to this wilful boy before he died was greater than his
fear of being dismissed as a petitioner. He had a strange,
overwhelming feeling that if he could somehow see the true
Hanuman, he would learn everything about shaida and halla.
Waiting until none of the novices was near, he whispered again,
'Hanuman, it is best not to touch your head to the ice. The
ice, even through the mat – it is very cold. Colder than the
air, yes?'
 Through his chattering teeth, Hanuman forced out, 'I've ...
never ... been so cold.'
  Danlo looked around him. Most of the nearby mats were empty,
and those few petitioners who were within listening distance
were curled up like dogs and seemed to be asleep. He pitched
his voice low and said, 'I have seen too many people go over.
And you, you will go over soon, I think, unless you– '
'No, I won't quit!'
 'But your life,' Danlo whispered, 'to keep it warm and quick,
your life is– '
'My life's worth nothing unless I can live it as I must!'
199
 'But you do not know how to live ... in the cold.'
'I'll have to learn, then, won't I?'
 Danlo smiled into the darkness. He squeezed the cold bamboo
shaft of the shakuhachi and said, 'Can you wait a little
longer? It will be morning soon. False winter nights are
short.'
  'Why are you talking to me?' Hanuman suddenly wanted to
know. 'Aren't you afraid of being caught?'
 'Yes,' Danlo said in a soft voice. 'I know we should not be
talking.'
  'You're different from the others.' Hanuman swept his arm in
an arc, waving at the motionless petitioners slumped down on
their mats. 'Look at them, asleep on the most important night
of their lives. None of them would take such a chance – you're
not like them at all.'
 Danlo touched Ahira's feather and thought back to the night
of his passage into manhood. 'It is hard to be different,
yes?'
 'It's hard to have a sense of yourself. Most people don't
know who they are.'
  'It is as if they were lost in a sarsara,' Danlo agreed.
'But it is hard to see yourself, the truth. Who am I, after
all? Who is anyone?'
 Hanuman coughed wickedly, then laughed. 'If you can ask that
question, you already know.'
'But I do not really know anything.'
'And that's the deepest knowledge of all.'
  They looked at each other knowingly and broke into soft
laughter. Immediately, though, their laughter died when a
novice clacked across the Square ten rows behind them. As they
waited for him to pass, Hanuman blew on his hands and began
shivering again.
  When it seemed safe, Danlo asked, 'You would risk your life
to enter the Academy?'
  'My life?' Hanuman rasped out. 'No, I'm not as ready to die
as you seem to think.'
He coughed for a while, then Danlo asked, 'Did you
200
journey here to become a pilot? It is my fate to be a pilot, I
think.'
'Your fate?'
  'I have dreamed of being...' Danlo began, and then fell
silent. 'I... I have always wanted to be a pilot.'
  'I also,' Hanuman said. To be a pilot, to interface with the
ship's computer, this continual vastening the pilots are
allowed – that's the beginning of everything.'
  'I had not thought of it that way.' Danlo looked up at the
Wolf and Thallow constellations and the other stars, and said,
simply, 'I will become a pilot so I can journey to the centre
of the Great Circle, to see if the universe is halla or
shaida.'
  He closed his eyes and pressed his cold thumbs against his
eyelids. To see the universe as it really is and say 'yes' to
that truth, as man and as asarya – how could he explain his
dream to anyone? In truth, the Alaloi are forbidden to reveal
their nighttime dreams or visions, so how could he tell Hanuman
that he had dreamed of becoming an asarya?
 'What is this word "halla" that you keep using?' Hanuman
asked.
  Danlo listened to the wind rise and whoosh between the
buildings. It fell over him, and he began to shiver. Despite
his discomfort, he loved the chill of the wind against his
face, the way it carried in the sea smells and a feeling of
freedom. How exhilarating it was to talk long past midnight
with such an aware, new friend! How reckless to talk beneath
the novice's ears with only the wind for cover! Suddenly, the
utter strangeness of kneeling on a scratchy mat and waiting
with three thousand other freezing boys and girls was too much.
He found himself telling Hanuman about the death of his parents
and his journey to Neverness. He tried to tell him about the
harmony and beauty of life, then, but he found that the simple
Alaloi concepts he had been taught sounded trite and naive when
translated into civilized language. 'Halla is the cry of the
wolf
201
 when he calls to his brothers and sisters,' he said. 'And it
is halla that the stars should shine at night when the sun
falls beneath the mountains. Halla is the way ... the way
false winter takes away the cold, and the way false winter
dies into the colder seasons so the animals do not become too
many and crowd the ice. Halla is ... oh, blessed halla! It is
so fragile when you try to define it, like crossing morilka,
the death ice. The greater weight you give it, the more likely
it is to break. Halla is. Sometimes, lately, I think of it as
pure isness. A way of simply being.'
 Hanuman pressed his lips together as he turned his face away
from the wind and tried not to cough. 'I've never known anyone
like you before,' he marvelled. To cross a thousand miles of
ice looking for something you call halla – and to do it
alone!'
  'Old Father warned me that if I told anyone, they might not
believe me. You will not ... tell anyone else?'
'Of course I won't. But you should know, I believe you.'
'Yes?'
  Hanuman stared at the feather in Danlo's hair, then coughed
and said, 'Danlo the Wild – you look a little wild. And the
way you see things, so wild. I'll have to think about what
you've said. Especially about being. Can it be enough just to
be? I've always dreamed of becoming.'
'Becoming ... what?'
'Becoming more,' Hanuman said.
  While Hanuman bent low with another coughing fit, Danlo
touched the shakuhachi's ivory mouthpiece with his lips. 'But
Hanu,' he said, impulsively inventing a diminutive form of his
name. He reached over and touched the boy's forehead. It was
burning hot. 'Hanu, Hanu, you are not becoming. You are dying.'
  'No, that's silly,' Hanuman said hoarsely. 'Please don't say
that.'
  After that, he lost his voice and began coughing in great
breaking waves. Danlo wondered why the novices or Bardo the
Just, who strolled among the petitioners from
202
 time to time, didn't take this unfortunate, dying boy inside
somewhere to heal him. He decided that entering the Order must
be a kind of passage. And like all passages into new levels of
being, there must always be danger and the possibility of
death.
  'Will you play your flute now?' Hanuman whispered. 'I can't
talk anymore.'
Danlo wet his lips and smiled. 'It is soothing, yes?'
 'Soothing? No, it's haunting, really. Haunting. There's
something about the way you play, the music. Something I can't
bear to hear. But something I have to hear. Do you understand?'
 Danlo played his music, then, even though his mouth was so
dry that the playing was difficult. He licked his lips for the
hundredth time. He was very thirsty. Since the morning coffee,
he had drunk nothing, and his tongue was dry against his teeth,
as dry as old seal leather. Of course he was hungry, too, with
his belly tightening up empty and aching, but the hunger wasn't
as bad as his need for water. And, in truth, he was colder than
he was thirsty. Soon, perhaps, the thirst would grow angry and
all-consuming, but now, as he played, the cold was more
immediate, like a stiff, frozen fur touching every part of him.
The wind blew down his neck, and the mat was icy against his
legs. It was hard to move his fingers, especially the two
smallest ones on his right hand: as a child, he had burned them
in the oilstones, and they were stiff with scar over the
knuckles and now almost numb. Somewhat clumsily, he played his
music while Hanuman watched and listened. And on Hanuman's
delicate face, in his eyes, there was a look of anguish,
whether from the music or cold it was hard to tell. Danlo
played to the anguish, all the time thinking of Old Father and
the 'holy pain' that he delighted in causing others. Danlo took
no joy in others' suffering, but he could appreciate the need
for pain as a stimulant. Pain is the awareness of life – that
was a saying of the Alaloi tribes. Life was pain, and in
Hanuman's pain,
203
 there was still an urge to life. This miracle of living,
though, was such a delicate thing liable to end at any moment.
He could see that Hanuman was dying – how much longer could his
will and inner fury keep him alive? Death is the left hand of
life, he thought, and death is halla, but suddenly he did not
want Hanuman to die.
  He set down the shakuhachi and whispered, 'Hanu, Hanu, keep
your hands inside your robe. Do not blow on them. Fingers claw
the cold from the air – do you understand?'
 Hanuman nodded and thrust his hands into either of his loose
sleeves. He said nothing as he began to cough and shiver even
more violently.
  'Hanu, Hanu, you were not made for the cold, were you?'
  Danlo rolled the thin wool of his robe between his fingers
and smiled grimly. The wind rose up and drove particles of ice
across the Square. It seemed that everyone was shivering, even
the tired novices in their white jackets. For a long time, as
the wind continued to blow, he looked at Hanuman. Hanuman had
spoken sophisticated words, and he had courage, but in truth he
was still just a boy, uncut and unseasoned against the world's
bitterness. He was frail and sick, and he would go over soon.
Danlo watched and waited for him to go over. He waited, all the
while wondering what dread, mysterious affinity connected his
life with Hanuman's. He studied Hanuman's fevered face, and,
somewhat worried at the turn of his thoughts, he decided that
he and Hanuman must share the same doffel. Surely Hanuman's
spirit animal must be the snowy owl or perhaps one of the other
kinds of thallow. Then, in the deepest, coldest part of night
with the wind dying and the world fallen silent, just before
dawn, Danlo heard Ahira calling him. 'Danlo, Danlo,' his
other-self said, 'Hanuman is your brother spirit and you must
not let him die.' Rashly, almost without thought, Danlo
shrugged off his robe. There was a smile on his lips, grim
204
necessity in his eyes. Then he leaned closer to Hanuman and
worked the rough wool over his head, down over his trembling
body. He knelt back down on his own mat, freezing and naked,
astonished at what he had done.
  Hanuman stared at him and smiled faintly. After a while he
closed his eyes in exhaustion. Danlo scooped up a few of the
nearby mats and built a half-pyramid over him. The overlapping
mats – and his robe – might keep the wind from killing him.
  'Danlo, Danlo, there is no pain as terrible as cold,' Ahira
whispered to him.
 While Danlo clenched his fists to keep from shivering,
Hanuman fell into unconsciousness and began to dream. It was
obvious he was dreaming: his eyelids fluttered like the wings
of a fritillary, and he moved his cracked, bleeding lips
silently. Then he began to murmur in his sleep, to call out
for his father. 'No, no, Father,' he said. 'No, no.'
  'Hanu, you must be quiet!' Danlo whispered. He looked around
to see if any of the other petitioners had been awakened. Among
the Alaloi it is taboo to disturb the sleep of others with
one's own dreams. Sleep is the sacred time, the return to the
natural state, which is at once the source and sustenance of
the spirit. To reveal a dream is to infect another's spirit
with images which must remain secret. If dreams weren't kept
sacred, Danlo believed, the spirits of all men and women would
fall into confusion and madness. 'Hanu, Hanu, wake up if you
cannot sleep!'
 But Hanuman was now lost into nightmare. There was sweat on
his face, terror on his lips. 'Father, Father!' he began to cry
out. 'No, no, no– '
  His shouts were cut off abruptly when Danlo leaned over and
clamped his hand over his mouth. 'Shhh!' Danlo said. His cold
hand hurt with the breath burning out of Hanuman's nose. 'Shhh,
go to sleep now!' he whispered. 'Shantih, go to sleep.'
 He cradled Hanuman's head in the crook of his arm as he held
his hand hard over the boy's mouth. He was afraid
205
one of the novices might hear the muffled cries. But the
nearest novice was fifty yards away leaning against the trunk
of a shih tree and heard nothing. Soon, to the whispered
supplication of, 'Shantih, go to sleep!', Hanuman fell into
dreamlessness and peace. When he was quiet and still, Danlo let
him go and returned to kneeling on his mat. He looked at the
thousands of mats lining the ice of Lavi Square, at the
thousands of suffering children; never in his life had he felt
so cold, so abandoned, so utterly alone.
 With dawn came a rising of the wind and the sun. 'Lura Sawel,'
Danlo whispered. 'O blessed sun, be quick to take away the
teeth of the wind.' But the sun was not quick that morning, and
the wind was still cold. The sky was salmon red, frozen with
high, wispy clouds. Soon after first light, with the sun still
lost behind the mountains to the east, Bardo the Just appeared
to take inventory of the night's attrition. He sent the novices
scurrying up and down the ranks and rows. They counted the
petitioners on their mats. Most of the mats were empty. Only
one thousand twenty-two petitioners remained. And of these,
only one thousand and twenty would continue the competition
into the next day – during the night, two girls had died. The
novices found them dead on their mats, seemingly asleep.
 They found something else, too. A cadre of novices on skates
surrounded Hanuman and Danlo. 'Look!' One of them pointed. This
boy is naked!'
 Bardo made his way carefully among the petitioners. Despite
his girth, he was light on his feet and adept at moving across
ice. He waggled a finger at Hanuman, half covered with mats and
still unconscious. 'And this boy,' he said, 'is wearing two
robes. Why is he wearing two robes?' He turned to Danlo, and
his carmine lips were tight with disapproval. 'You're naked, by
God! – do you understand me, boy? Incline your head once if the
answer is "yes": Did you give this other boy your robe?'
Danlo nodded his head. He was kneeling low with his
206
 thighs pressing his chest. His skin was ivory in the early
light, and along his naked back and sides, the muscles
quivered like the strings of a gosharp. He hated it that
everyone was looking at him.
 'Extraordinary!' Bardo thundered. 'Remarkable – this is
worthy of remark: in all my years as Master of Novices, I've
never seen such a selfless act. Who would have thought anyone
would strip off his robe and give it to another? Why did you
do that, boy? Ah, excuse me, you may not speak. Such a
selfless act – and reckless! How do you think to last another
day? It's damn cold out here!'
  Danlo looked up, saying nothing. Something in his deep blue
eyes must have irritated Bardo, for he snapped, 'Don't stare at
me, boy, it's impolite! Ah, why, why, why must I suffer these
impolitenesses?'
 Danlo continued to stare, not at Bardo, with his black beard
and sad, self-pitying face, but rather through him, up at the
sky. Ti-miura halla, he thought, follow your fate. He stared at
the beautiful circle of the sky, at the cloud patterns and
colours. Ti-miura halla.
  Obviously, Bardo the Just mistook this unspoken, open-eyed
prayer of Danlo's as a sign of defiance. 'Impolite boy!' he
said. 'Does anyone know this boy's name?'
 A conceited-seeming novice named Pedar came closer and said,
'I saw him in the Ice Dome – they call him Danlo the Wild.'
 'Then stay close to this wild boy for the rest of the day,'
Bardo said. 'Watch him – I'll be dining at the Hofgarten, so
you'll have to watch him closely.' He looked back and forth
between Danlo and Hanuman, all the while muttering, 'Impolite
boy!'
 And so Danlo knelt beneath the watchful eyes of the novice,
Pedar Sadi Sanat. Pedar was the oldest of the high novices
patrolling the Square; he was a diligent boy with hard little
eyes and a face covered with pimples and pock-marks. Like some
of the high novices, he liked to torment
207
 first year novices and petitioners. He kept a vigil over
Danlo and Hanuman. From time to time, to his passing friends,
he would call out witticisms such as: 'Behold the Boy of Ice!
How does he keep from freezing to death? Has he had his blood
carked with juf? With drugs? Behold Danlo the Wild!'
   Some of the other novices skated closer to gawk at Danlo.
Soon, word of his deed spread throughout Borja. Novices fresh
from their morning thought exercises took a few moments to pass
through Lavi Square. Danlo was surrounded with girls and boys
laughing, pointing at him. Hundreds of steel blades cracked the
ice near him and flung up patches of chiselled snow. Hunched
over as he was in the unfamiliar kneeling posture, his muscles
began to ache and cramp. He longed to move, to stretch out his
stiff legs, but he did not want anyone to view the cuts and
scars of his manhood.
 'I've never seen a naked boy before!' a pretty novice
giggled. 'His arms, his back, the muscles – he looks like a
sculpture of a god!'
  Another girl stood next to her beneath a shih tree. She was
older, a yellow-haired journeyman holist almost womanly in the
fullness of her body. She craned her neck to get a better view
and said, 'Well I have seen naked boys before. This Danlo the
Wild, whoever he is – he's splendid.'
 Many of the petitioners were up on their mats, watching him
too. And as the morning passed, quite a few masters from Lara
Sig and Upplysa came to see what could be causing such a
commotion. One of them, the famous remembrancer Thomas Rane,
chastised Pedar for his cruelty. Master Thomas Rane, who had a
fine head of silvery hair and noble face, smoothed out the
folds of his silver robe and said, 'Pedar, don't you remember
when you began your novitiate three years ago? What was it they
called you – "Pedar the Pimple"? And now you accuse this boy of
carking his flesh with juf. Yes, there are substances to keep
the blood from freezing, but they are no help
 208
 against cold and hypothermia. He gave his robe to another! You
should applaud his act, not deride him for it.'
  In truth, many of the people standing over Danlo seemed to
be in awe of his toughness and resolve, as well as his
selflessness. 'He gave his robe to his friend,' one novice or
another would explain to the continuous stream of arriving
spectators. 'He's been like this all night, naked as ice.'
Pedar shooed away a couple of novices who were standing too
close. He stripped off his white glove, then bent over and felt
Danlo's back. 'And his skin is cold as ice,' he announced.
 'What about the other boy?'
  'His face is hot,' Pedar said as he held his fingers to
Hanuman's cheek. 'He's sick. I don't know how either of them
will last the day.'
  One of Pedar's fellow novices agreed. 'Not this day – that's
certain. I think it will snow
before nightfall.'
   Indeed, the sky was full of snow sign; Danlo had known since
first light that there would be snow that day. He smelled
moisture in the air, the ominous shifting of the wind to the
south. And then there was no wind, and the clouds thickened
up, the silver wisps growing out of nowhere into an
impenetrable, icy grey. A wet cold descended over the world.
Eesha-kaleth, as the Alaloi named it. On many mornings of his
life, he had felt the coldness before snow. And now, waiting
beneath the grey, gravid sky, there was a foreboding that
recalled his deepest memories, distant childhood images of
chilled teeth, bewilderment, and dread. He feared the snow. No
man (or boy), he thought, should have to bare his flesh to the
snow. Suddenly, in shivering waves tearing down his chest and
belly, he was afraid of snow as he had never been before. That
afternoon snow began to fall. Large sharp flakes broke against
his back and melted. Ice water pooled against his spine, and
in freezing rivulets, ran down his side. Every particle of
melted snow stole a little heat from his body, and there were
many, many particles of snow. His numbed
209
 skin, his throat, his eyes – everything about him hurt. There
no pain so terrible as cold, he thought. Soon, he would stop
shivering, and then he must ask to be carried inside, either
that or die.
   He might have quit, then, but he remembered that he was
engaged in a competition. Beside him, deep in fever, Hanuman
still slept. Often, Danlo thought his sleep was with death.
Each time when he had almost given up hope, however, Hanuman
would cough, and the snowy mats covering him would rattle and
shake. The fever was saving the boy, keeping him warm beneath
layers of robes, mats and snow. All the others around him, of
course, were also being covered with snow. And they each wore
robes, but there was no real heat in clothing. Clothing could
keep heat in; it could not make heat. Only a living thing such
as a star or a body's inner fires could make heat.
 'Look at them quit!' Danlo heard one of the novices exclaim.
'A little snow and they can't stand it.'
  Many petitioners began standing up, brushing snow from their
sodden robes, and leaving the Square. All but a few of the mats
within fifty yards of Danlo and Hanuman were empty. Danlo
lifted his head to count the remaining petitioners. A stand of
yu trees obscured his vision; he couldn't see much of the
Square's southern half. But from what he could see – rows of
abandoned mats broken here and there by a miserable, shivering,
snow-covered child – he estimated that only two hundred of them
were left. Two hundred out of seven thousand! How much longer,
he wondered, would Bardo the Just allow the competition to go
on?
  'Behold the boy of ice!' Pedar called out. There was
vindictiveness in his voice, and darker emotions. Despite
Master Rane's chastisement – or because of it – he obviously
had decided to hate Danlo. 'Why not quit? Shall I take you
inside where it's warm? Why not quit now, while you can, Wild
Boy? Danlo the Wild, the Nameless Child – don't you think you
should quit?'
210
 Snow covered Danlo's head and back; even the upturned soles
of his feet were layered with snow. His skin had fallen blue
cold, too cold to melt the snow. 'Quit now! Wouldn't it be so
easy to quit?'
  Danlo was breathing hard, almost gasping for air. He had
stopped shivering. His muscles had hardened up like knots of
cold shatterwood; he didn't know if he could move to stand,
even if he were willing to quit. His belly ached with cold. The
cold mat cut his kneecaps. The cold was like a stone point
being hammered into his bones. Soon even his bones would grow
numb, but now there was agony along his legs and spine. Cold
and pain, pain and cold – it seemed that the world was made of
nothing else. He tried to think of a way out of the cycle of
pain, but his thoughts were sluggish, as opaque and slow-moving
as glacier ice. Why should he care about the world's pain, or
even his own? He began falling into a deep well of torpor and
insensibility. He remembered, dimly, something he had once
heard as a child. While the snow fell silently over him and his
will to live cooled, he remembered that certain hunters of his
tribe had spoken of a discipline called lotsara. Lotsara, the
burning of the blood. There was a way to look within, to light
the body's inner fires and burn with warmth. Anyone could learn
this way. Any man, that is. He knew that the art of lotsara was
part of the Song of Life, a small part of the lore he would
have been taught had he completed his passage into manhood.
Only a man could apprehend the ebb and flow of the world's
energies. (He wondered if the women taught such arts in their
ceremonies, but he didn't know.) Only a man could have enough
experience of himself to look inward at that secret place where
the fires of being burst into life.
  Only a man ... He remembered certain things that Haidar had
once told him about lotsara. As in the open-waiting attitude
of the hunter, the face of being must be cleared. But instead
of looking through to the other side of day with clear vision,
he must look deep within for his anima;
211
 specifically, he must look for the life fire that is the most
vital pan of anima, and in so doing, he must face himself.
  Because the world was only a swirling cloud of snow –
because his sight was failing – he closed his eyes. There was
darkness and silence as vast as the night. He descended into
himself; it was like venturing into an unknown, unexplored
cavern. Unknown, and yet he seemed instinctively to know the
way. The remembered stories of his elders guided him; he could
almost hear Haidar chanting, 'Ti-miura anima, ti-miura wilu
sibana: to follow your anima, follow the hunger of your will.'
Deep in his belly, he found the place where the anima dwelt.
Behind his navel, almost touching his spine – that was the
secret place. At birth, the navel of man was cut off from
creation's fires, but deeper inside a part of the sacred flame
always burned. And now the flame was as tenuous and dim as that
of a dying oilstone; now he must make it burn more brightly. He
envisioned the fat tissues of his body. Between skin and
muscle, in his chest, belly and groin, along the soles of his
feet and the palms of his hands, was a thin layer of fat. He
was as lean as knotted rope leather, but even bodies that have
once starved retain a trace of fat. There was scant fat, but
what little there was, he envisioned melting like blubber
inside an oilstone. Melting, heating, flowing inside him,
catching fire. There was a fire in his belly, then, and it was
hot. It burned and grew hotter, touched his blood. The fire of
life raced along his blood. His veins were burning vessels of
fire, burning and branching down his legs and arms, quickening
even his numbed fingertips with heat. Into his skin came a hot,
red flush. The snow atop his back began to thaw. Soon the snow
was falling down his sides in slushy clumps. Snowflakes
striking his bare, red skin dissolved instantly into drops of
water. But the water was not cold; he felt life rushing hot in
every part of him, and he couldn't imagine ever being cold
again.
 'Look!' someone said. 'Look how red his skin is! The snow's
melting off him.'
212
  Pedar worked his skates closer to Danlo and felt his arm.
'It's hot,' he said. 'It was cold, and now it's hot.'
 'I've heard of such things,' another said. 'Down in the
Farsider's Quarter, some of the avadhutas soak their robes in
water. And sit outside in winter all night long. They dry their
robes with their body heat. Do you think he's an avadhuta?'
  'Who knows?' Pedar said. He picked at one of the pimples on
his cheek. He did not seem pleased. 'It must be a trick,
though. A drug. No one could melt snow like this without
drugs.'
 The crowd surrounding Danlo broke into tens of arguments.
Most of the novices wanted to believe that he hadn't used
drugs, though no one seemed to know what else could be the
source of his heat.
  Just then, Bardo the Just returned, wobbling on his skates.
Despite the snow, his bulging forehead was dripping with sweat.
His huge nose, which was shot with a webwork of tiny broken
veins, glistened purple-black. He liked to drink beer at any
time of the day; the novices knew this, and they tried to avoid
him when he was drunk. 'By God, what do any of you know about
drugs!' he shouted as he heaved closer and wrapped his moist,
meaty hand around the back of Danlo's neck. 'He is hot,' he
pronounced. 'But it can't be the result of a drug. When have
the petitioners ever been tested by cold before, eh? Until the
day before yesterday, I myself, Bardo the Just, didn't know
what this year's test would be. How could this wild boy know?
No, it's something else, something remarkable. Ah ... strange.
There are ancient disciplines – this Danlo the Wild has been
taught things.'
  Pedar slung his toepick against the ice, kicking up flowers
of snow against Danlo's face. He asked, 'What kind of things?'
  Instantly, Bardo pirouetted like a master ice dancer and
cuffed Pedar's ear. He could turn cruel when he was drunk,
cruel and sentimental. 'What's wrong with you!' Bardo
213
 bellowed. 'Kicking snow in this poor boy's face when he can't
get off his mat! I told you to watch him, not torture him.'
Then he stroked his moustache and began talking to himself in a
deep, melodious voice: 'Ah, too bad, Bardo, my friend – why did
you leave a novice to do your work?'
 Pedar, stunned by the quickness and force of Bardo's blow,
stood with his hand clapped over his ear. His face was full of
hate as he cowered and glared down at Danlo.
 The novices surrounding Bardo seemed to shrink back as if
they too were afraid of being struck. One of Pedar's friends
waved his hand at the almost empty Square and asked, 'Please,
Master Lal, how much longer can it go on? There are only a
hundred of them left.'
  Bardo squinted his shiny brown eyes against the falling
snow. He looked at Danlo and frowned. 'Look at this poor, naked
boy!' he exclaimed to the novices. 'He's more patient than any
of you!' Then he grunted and puffed as he bent low and cupped
his hands over Danlo's ear. His breath was sour with beer, and
he whispered, 'Are you testing me, or am I testing you? I've
never seen anyone as hard as you. Ah, that is, there's only
been one other. Who are you, by God? No, no, do not answer, you
may not speak. But tell me, Wild Boy – shake your head if the
answer is "no" – if I let the test go on, you won't die and
make me look like a barbarian, will you?'
Silently, Danlo smiled and shook his head.
 'The test continues!' Bardo announced as he straightened up.
The test will be over when it's over.'
  And so Danlo and the hundred remaining petitioners waited
through the long day. In the silence of the snowfall, in the
whiteness of the buildings around the Square, it was hard to
tell how much time had passed. Danlo knelt on his mat and
watched sparkling snowflakes tumble through the air. He was
afire with lotsara and with hope, but his body's tissues were
burning too quickly. He was very thirsty. Quite a few of the
petitioners had fallen deathly ill after eating mouthfuls of
snow, but he knew better than
214
to eat snow, even though his throat was hot and parched, even
though his heart felt like a pool of lava surging against his
breastbone. Soon he would collapse; soon would come crushing
weakness, a stilling of eyelight, and finally, oblivion. And
then he would never journey beyond the stars to find halla; his
only journey would be to the other side of day where the sea is
white and cold and bare, and the ice of eternity goes on and on
forever.
  'Danlo, Danlo.' He thought he heard Hanuman whispering to
him, but in truth, Pedar and the other high novices were
keeping too close a watch for anyone to risk whispering. And
Hanuman was still sleeping beneath his double robes, beneath
his mats and thick blanket of snow. How troubled the boy
seemed, wincing and coughing in his sleep. Then, as Danlo
looked on, Hanuman came gradually awake. He rose through his
fever, murmuring, and he looked at Danlo. 'Danlo, Danlo,' his
eyes seemed to cry out, 'I owe you my life.'
 'Look,' Pedar said as he pointed at Hanuman, 'the sick boy is
awake.'
  Bardo the Just and hundreds of chattering novices stood
around making embarrassing comments as to Danlo's and Hanuman's
courage, recounting the events of the day. And then Pedar
snarled at Danlo, 'It's unlikely that you'll pass the other
tests even if you pass this one. But if you do, I hope you're
assigned to my dormitory. It's called Perilous Hall, Wild Boy.
Can you remember that name?'
  Although this hazing was directed at Danlo, its effect on
Hanuman was startling. Hanuman's face, already deathly white,
grew cold and hard as if his skin was frozen. The only part of
him that seemed alive was his eyes, which were burning with a
pale fury. This fury frightened Danlo, for it seemed to come
out of nowhere. Furious over Pedar's words, Hanuman tried to
kick away the mats and sit up. But he was too weak to move. He
lay staring at Danlo, helpless in his fury and his shame.
215
 There, in the falling snow, Hanuman and Danlo waited together
locked eye to eye; neither of them wanted to be the first to
look away. While many people stood above them commenting on the
unseasonable snowfall, a silent communication flowed between
them, secrets that both of them knew they must never reveal.
Danlo was aware of Hanuman's intense powers of concentration,
his devotion to friendship and fate; they were both very aware
of each other. Thus they waited all afternoon, and Danlo wanted
to say, 'Hanu, Hanu, you are as dangerous as Ayeye, the
thallow.' Then from a distance came the faint ringing of Resa's
evening bells. The crowd around them stirred. Among the weary
novices who had been patrolling Lavi Square since dawn, there
were grumblings, quick arguments, a rippling wave of concern
for Danlo and Hanuman, and for the others. Then Bardo the Just
rubbed his eyes, shot Danlo a curious, admiring look, and he
clapped his hands.
  'Silence, it's time!' he said. He was speaking to the
novices and to the crowd of onlookers; the miserable
petitioners were as silent as they had been since the first
morning of their competition. 'Silence, it's time, by God! It's
time that the Test of Patience came to an end. You
petitioners,' he began, and then he shut his mouth abruptly.
One of his novices, breathless from a quick trip through the
Square, chose that moment to tell him something. And Bardo went
on, 'You seventy-two petitioners have survived the first test.
We welcome you to continue with the second test, which will
begin five days hence. There are hot baths, coffee and food
waiting for you in the dormitories. The novices will escort you
there. Congratulations – you may now leave your places and
speak as you wish.'
 Instantly, there were shouts of relief; petitioners were
arising from their mats shivering as they slapped blood back
into their limbs and rushed to follow the novices inside.
216
  'Danlo the Wild!' a novice in the crowd suddenly called out.
'Someone get a fur for Danlo the Wild!'
  Still on his mat, Danlo knocked snow from his dishevelled
hair and tried to stand. He could not. He no longer cared if
Pedar and the others beheld his cut membrum. In truth, he could
not stand because his joints were stiff and locked, shooting
with pain. There was agony in his loins convulsing up his spine
to his neck. As the snow and air found his exposed belly, as
the fire of lotsara left him, he began shivering again. Even
though someone threw a thick shagshay fur over his naked
shoulders, he couldn't stop shivering. 'Hanu, Hanu,' he said as
he staggered in a half-crouch over to his friend. 'Hanu, it's
over.'
 Hanuman, of all the petitioners (except five unfortunate boys
who were found dead), remained motionless on his mat. Indeed,
many thought that he too had died, but Danlo could still see
the life inside him. A novice arrived carrying a bulky shagshay
fur, and Danlo helped him lay it over Hanuman's body.
  'Danlo, are you all right?' Hanuman asked softly. He was
breathing as rapidly as a snow hare, and he had stopped
coughing. 'I was afraid you were going to die.'
  After that the novices carried Hanuman away. Danlo was left
to fend off the congratulations of the curious crowd. Someone
eased into his hand a mug of hot coffee, which he gulped down
gratefully. He stood closely pressed by a hundred cheering
strangers, surrounded yet alone with his thoughts.
  And then Pedar came up to him; his pimply face was red and
inflamed from the cold. 'We'll take care of him,' he said.
 'What will you do ... with my friend?' Danlo asked.
  'Your friend?' Pedar asked. 'Listen, Wild Boy, there's an
old saying you should know: "Save a person's life, make an
enemy for life". I don't think that boy will ever be your
friend.'
Danlo covered his eyes against the falling snow, and he
217
wondered about Hanuman. As he began walking with the other
novices toward the warmth of the waiting dormitories, he hoped
that Pedar would be wrong.
218



CHAPTER SEVEN

Perilous Hall

The Universal Syntax: invented by Omar Narayama on Arcite
twenty years before the founding of Neverness. The emergence
of holism during the Fifth Mentality was fully realized in the
development of the universal syntax. It is perhaps an accident
of history that where the invention of science depended upon a
mathematics as old as the civilizations of Babylonia and Ur,
the universal syntax was discovered long after holism began to
permeate and even supersede science. How human knowledge of
the universe might have evolved had the reverse been the case
is arguable, but without the development of the universal
syntax, the full articulation of holism certainly would have
been impossible.
Abstract of Main Line Information: Omar Narayama was a linguist
in the Order of Scientists; ironically his life's work was to
spell the demise of that ancient order and forever change man's
approach to science. Narayama, like other scientists at the end
of the Age of Simulation, had come to realize the limitations
of computer modellings of the phenomena and laws of spacetime.
He sought a universalization of science – it was the Holy Grail
of his times. A century earlier, the Fravashi language
philosophies had profoundly influenced the intellectual climate
of the Civilized Worlds. Narayama was a student of the
Fravashi, and he began his career with a solution to the
essential problem of formalistic cognition: what is it we see
when we see? Narayama hypothesized that we see a bunch of
glued-together sticks as a chair; we see a latticework of
carbon atoms fixed into platinum as a diamond ring. It was with
the formalization of
219
 the concept 'as' that Narayama laid the foundations for the
universal syntax. His life's work – and the work of those
followed him – was to utilize the structures of language in
order to model those aspects of reality too complex to be
represented by a strictly science-oriented mathematics.
Branching Information Lines, more at Holism:
Omar Narayama, biography; History of Science; Causality;
Causal Decoupling; Backward Causality and the Theory of
Scrying; Arcite; History of the Order of Cetics; the Order of
New Scientists; the Order of New Scientists – Schism and War;
The Age of Simulation; the Fifth Mentality; the Fravashi
Songlines; Fravashi Philosophy; Fravashi Theories of
Language.
 – Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1,754th Edition, Tenth Revised
Standard Version

 During the days of his recuperation Danlo saw nothing of
Hanuman li Tosh. By making inquiries of several high novices
whom he befriended, he discovered that Hanuman had been taken
to Borja's main hospice, there to be healed – if that was his
fate – or to begin his journey to the other side of day. For
Danlo this period of waiting before the next test was full of
both pleasure and uncertainty. He worried about Hanuman; at
times, when he fell back into the easy, familiar ways of
childhood and forgot that he was a man (or almost a man) he
worried about himself. But, in truth, it was not in Danlo's
nature to worry overlong. Life is lived in the Now-moment, as
the Alaloi say, and he took a joy in the simple and most
immediate activities of life: in drinking hot, mint teas,
sleeping and eating, awakening every morning to coffee, bread
and hot baths, and before each morning was ended, sleeping some
more. After his ordeal in the snow, his keenest joy was in
simply being warm. He, like each of the other seventy
220
 petitioners, had been given a tiny private room in the
Farsider's dormitory just west of Lavi Square. He spent whole
days sitting in front of his room's fireplace. While spruce
logs crackled on the grate and flames danced against blackened
stones, he liked to turn his face to the fire, to bask naked in
the rippling red waves of heat, and play his shakuhachi. At the
end of each day he would eat a sumptuous meal of wild rice and
almonds, snowberries in cream, egg flower soup, nutcakes or
other rich foods, and he would walk through the dormitory
greeting his fellow petitioners. Sometimes various novices –
boys and girls whom he did not know – would come to visit him
in order to satisfy their curiosity. Once, on the third day
following his ordeal, a tall, dour novice named Kiril Burian
walked into Danlo's room and told him, 'I saw what you did in
the Square. How did you keep from freezing to death? Where is
your home? If you get past the next tests, I hope you're
assigned to my dormitory – Isabel Hall, it's called. You'd be
welcomed there, even if you are an outsider.'
  Danlo found his instant fame and popularity strange. He
didn't really understand popularity. He was familiar, of
course, with prowess, veneration, and friendship – these were
good Alaloi concepts. But the novices who sought his company
did not really seem to want him as a friend, not at first, nor
did they venerate what little wisdom he had acquired during his
quest to find halla. His popularity, as far as he could see,
stemmed from a single deed of friendship toward Hanuman and
from a prowess of lotsara that all full men should possess. And
how he hated the infectious nature of popularity! That people
would wish to associate with him not for the qualities of his
face – that is, for his self-awareness, character, and mind –
but simply because they perceived a social utility in being
seen with someone who was temporarily the centre of attention,
he found silly and perverse. He hated, too, the way the
petitioners were maltreated and scorned. Petitioners – a very
few of them – could become novices, but it seemed that
221
since they had not attended the Order's elite schools, they
would always be regarded as outsiders. This elitism and vanity
of novices such as Pedar, he hated deeply. But because he
regarded hatred as the vilest of emotions, a black, churning
rent in the ocean of his being which might swallow him whole at
any time, he did not allow himself to hate. Instead, as a
discipline, he tried to make friends with as many novices as he
could. In almost everyone, even in Pedar, he found some aspect
of face, spirit or anima which he could revere. Many years
later, Hanuman li Tosh would say to him: 'I've never known
anyone who liked as many things as you do.' Ironically, Danlo's
unrestrained love of life wherever he found it was to win him
many friends and bring him even greater popularity.
 Early in the morning of the thirty-first day, Danlo was
finally called to be tested. Unlike the Test of Patience, the
next crucial tests were not public, and he underwent them
alone. In a cold stone room of the Akashic's Tower, a jolly
master akashic named Hannah li Hua placed a heaume over his
head and tested the physical structures of his brain. She
tested for other things as well, but she refused to reveal the
nature of these tests to Danlo. When she bade goodbye to him,
she never told if he had done well or ill, but simply said, 'I
hope your petition is accepted, Danlo the Wild.' Over the next
few days, Danlo came to know the Academy very well, for he
crossed and re-crossed its lovely grounds many times. Upplysa,
with its basalt arches and narrow, winding pathways, was the
largest of the Order's colleges. There, the master
eschatologist, Kolenya Mor, tested his knowledge of holism and
the universal syntax; there, too, he was summoned before Thomas
Rane and Octavia of Darkmoon, who, as Old Father had warned
would happen, tested him to see if he was a man of shih. His
last test was with a famous pilot, an exemplar named the
Sonderval. At Resa, the pilot's college, the Sonderval posed
twelve mathematical theorems to Danlo and then invited him to
attempt proofs or disproofs. Danlo was able
222
 to prove only five of the twelve theorems, and he therefore
concluded that he had failed this very important test. When he
asked the Sonderval if this was so, he was told, The Master of
Novices will inform you as to the results of your tests after
the board convenes to decide your petition.'
 'The Master of Novices,' Danlo said. This Bardo the Just – he
is a just man, yes?'
 At this innocent question, the Sonderval smiled arrogantly,
then said, 'If you're accepted into the Order, then you'll
learn about Bardo the Just.'
  Altogether, 'Bardo the Just' had assembled a board of five
prominent masters to examine the petitioners. As Danlo would
learn, Bardo had chosen such an illustrious quintet to honour
the petitioners. But it did not really require the skills and
wisdom of famous masters to test petitioners. Bardo had
inveigled his friends – Kolenya Mor, Octavia and the others –
to participate in the Festival of the Unfortunate Petitioners
for selfish reasons. In truth, he had pleaded with them to do
him this favour; he had done this because he wished to honour
himself. Some years before, he had been passed over for the
lordship of the pilots. Chanoth Chen Ciceron had been made Lord
Pilot in his place – or so the envious Bardo complained to any
of his friends who would listen. And Bardo, who thought of
himself as the finest and most able of the pilots to have
survived the infamous Pilots' War thirteen years previously,
had been made Master of Novices, a humble position with few
possibilities for either power or glory. And so he liked to
surround himself with the Order's most distinguished men and
women, to share in their radiance, and all the while, secretly,
he chafed and raged at the unfairness of life.
 He was a vain man, yes, but ultimately his vanity (and his
compassion) would accrue to Danlo's favour. After Danlo had
finished his last test, he was summoned to the Novices'
Sanctuary, a huge, forbidding building overlooking Borja's many
dormitories. A novice met Danlo at
223
 the door of the Sanctuary and led Danlo to Bardo's formal
chambers in the west wing. After Danlo knocked at the door,
Bardo invited Danlo inside into a room decorated with rich
furniture and rare works of art. 'Ah, it's the Wild Boy,'
Bardo said. 'Danlo the Wild – are you really a nameless child,
after all?'
  Bardo led Danlo to one of the windows looking out over
Borja. Almost at the foot of the window, set into the dark
floor, were two rectangular stones all smooth and grey and
slightly concave, as if a fine chisel had scooped out their
centres. These were the famous kneeling stones of Borja. Bardo
bade Danlo drop down on the kneeling stones, facing the window.
He himself pulled up an immense, padded leather chair and
positioned it at a right angle to Danlo so that he could see
the side of Danlo's face. While Danlo gazed out at the Tycho's
Spire, which overwhelmed Borja's lesser buildings, Bardo
studied his face and finally said, 'By God, who are you?'
 Although Bardo had warned Danlo not to turn his head, he had
said nothing of his eyes, and so Danlo knelt there locked in
thought, and his eyes flicked back and forth, straining to take
in sights of the room. He could barely see Bardo, but directly
ahead of him, Bardo's bearded profile and the shadow of his
chair played against rich tapestries on the wall.
'You may speak when I've asked you a question.'
  Danlo touched the feather in his hair as he thought of how
Old Father would answer the question of identity. Because he
knew it was unseemly (and foolish) to vex his elders, he tried
to restrain himself, but finally, he couldn't help saying, 'Who
are you, sir? Who is anybody?'
'Who am .'?'
  Danlo smiled slyly, then asked, 'Have you ever seen me
before?'
'No.'
'Then how do you know it is me?'
There was a long pause full of Bardo's raspy breathing,
224
 and then he burst out, 'Impolite boy! By God, how do I know it
is you? Is this a Fravashi word game? You were a student of the
Fravashi, weren't you?'
 Danlo nodded his head while he looked out the window at the
clouds in the sky.
  'Well, listen, my funny boy: How do you dare play your
impolite Fravashi games with me? Don't you know that I have to
decide whether to make you a novice, or not? Don't you know
that – stop it now! Stop laughing, or I'll have to dismiss you
immediately!' And then he was addressing himself again,
mumbling wearily, 'Ah, Bardo, Bardo, what have you done?'
  Danlo couldn't help laughing because Bardo was a funny man,
at once passionate and self-pitying, compassionate and slightly
cruel. Finally, though, he restrained himself and said, 'I am
sorry, sir. It is just that laughter ... is blessed, yes?'
 While Bardo pulled at his beard, he cleared his throat and
said, The truth is, there is something familiar about you.
Where are you from?'
 'If I told you where I was from, you might not believe me.'
 'Test me, please; test my belief and tell me, who were your
parents? On which world were you born?'
 'I am not sure ... I should tell you, sir.'
  'Ah, you think to keep secrets,' Bardo said. 'Well, at least
you're not of Tria, nor have you had contact with the
warrior-poets.'
  Danlo was cold in his robe and sandals, though not nearly so
cold as he had been during his day and night in Lavi Square.
The bare floor hurt his knees. He brushed his knuckles against
the grey stone, which thousands of novices' knees had worn
smooth. He thought the kneeling stones must be very old, though
he couldn't know that, along with all the other stones of the
Sanctuary, they had been transported from Arcite at the
founding of the Order long ago. 'How do you know I am not from
Tria?'
225
'Are you?'
 'No,' Danlo said smiling, 'I have never heard of Tria. What
is Tria?'
  From his side came Bardo's deep basso voice, 'By God, why
must you answer a question with a question! You should know
something right away, Wild Boy. It's impolite for petitioners –
or novices or even journeymen – to question their masters.
Unless they've first requested and been granted permission.
Now, how is it you haven't heard of Tria? The merchant pilots?
Ah, you know nothing of the warrior-poets?'
 Danlo looked out the window to the north. He saw the rows of
fine, old granite buildings – the boys' dormitories – and the
Academy's north wall just beyond them. 'No, I have never heard
of warrior-poets,' he said truthfully.
'Ahhhh,' Bardo said.
'May I ask you a question, sir?'
'Please, ask.'
'How did you know I am not a warrior and a poet?'
  'You mean, a warrior-poet. Warrior-poets are assassins who
kill people for money and for religious reasons. And of course
you're not one of them. You're too young – they all have a
certain look. What I know is that you've never had contact with
one. Master Hua told me this.'
  Danlo stared out the window to the south, at the girls'
dormitories, which were arrayed in concentric circles, little
white domes against the sparkling white of newly fallen snow.
He had been afraid that when Master Hua examined his brain, she
would discover everything about him. 'She can see my mind, I
think.'
 'Well, she can certainly read segments of your memory.'
 'Then she must have told you where I was born.'
 'Not true.' Bardo's shadow moved as if he were pulling at his
beard; on the wall in front of Danlo, darkening a tapestry of
many nude, dancing women, he could see a shadow hand against a
huge, shadow face. 'Not at all true, Wild Boy. Master Hua is an
akashic. She's been intimate
226
with your memory. She must respect and guard confidences – the
canons of our Order require this. I asked her certain
questions about you. I was able to determine where you're not
from. And that you're not a slel mime of the warrior-poets,
nor a Trian spy, nor an Architect of the Old Cybernetic Church
or of any other religion, order or cabal on the proscribed
list.'
'The proscribed list?'
'Is that a question, Wild Boy?'
  Danlo pressed his knuckles against the floor to take some of
the weight off his knees. He hated the custom of kneeling
because he thought it unnatural and unseemly for a man to so
defer to another. 'I mean, may I ask you a question, sir?'
'Please ask.'
'What is the proscribed list?'
 Bardo belched and licked his lips. 'It's the list of our
enemies. The Order has survived for three thousand years, but
not by admitting enemies into our halls.'
  'I am no one's enemy,' Danlo said. He dropped his eyes down
to the floor as he thought of what Pedar had said to him in
Lavi Square. He wondered if his saving Hanuman's life could
really cause two friends to become enemies. 'I am ... not even
sure what you are talking about.'
 'How astonishingly ... ah, that is to say, it's surprising
that you could be so– '
'Ignorant, yes?'
 Bardo belched again and coughed in embarrassment. 'I didn't
want to say the word. And don't interrupt me, please. Well, you
are ignorant, aren't you? You're different from the other
petitioners. And then there is the matter of your hair. Black
and red – like that of Mallory Ringess. And your face, hard as
flint – you've the Ringess nose, too. And your damn eyes. Ah, I
don't really want to discuss your eyes. Please tell me, you've
been sculpted, haven't you? It's a common enough practice
lately. Mallory
227
Ringess becomes a goddamned god, and so it's natural enough
that people would want to sculpt their faces and hair colour to
look like him.'
  No one had ever remarked upon Danlo's resemblance to Mallory
Ringess. Bardo's observation pleased Danlo and added weight to
his theory of his true parentage, but he didn't want to explain
this theory to Bardo, so he said, 'This is how I was born. My
hair is my hair, and my face ... a man must grow into his face,
yes?'
 'Ahhh,' Bardo said, 'you may keep your secrets if you must,
but I must inform you, it won't aid your petition.'
Danlo stared out the window and said nothing.
  'Well, then, perhaps you can tell me how you raised your
metabolism so goddamned dramatically during your test? Your
skin was as hot as a whore's breath! That's a cetic art –
you've had cetic training, eh?'
  'No, sir.' Danlo pressed the point of his finger against his
robe where it covered his navel and said, There is a place in
the belly ... the life fire, indwelling, and if you can
envision it as a flame, then– '
  'Stop!' Bardo called out as he clapped his hands together.
He pushed himself to his feet, which wasn't an easy thing to do
considering his immense bulk and the lowness of the chair. He
stood in front of Danlo and above him. His face was full of
perplexity and wonder. There's something strange about you. Who
are you, by God? What you've just described – it sounds like
the Alaloi practice of lotsara!'
  It was as if Danlo had fallen through the ice into the sea,
so quickly did he gasp for air and his muscles seize up. He
knelt there looking up at Bardo the Just in amazement, and his
belly muscles wouldn't stop quivering. How could this vain,
ugly man know of lotsara? Had Hanuman betrayed him by telling
of his origins and secret quest to find halla? Of course, had
Danlo known more of the recent history of the Order, he would
have heard the story of Bardo's journey to the Alaloi. But he
never suspected that Bardo had accompanied Mallory Ringess on
this disastrous
228
journey. What he feared was that the akashic woman had read his
deepest memories – either that, or somehow Bardo could read his
mind. Didn't the men and women of the Unreal City possess many
inexplicable powers? In truth, he didn't really believe that
any human being could read another's mind without the aid of a
shaida computer. (No matter how many times Danlo was to
interface computers – and there would be many, many times – no
matter how profound the experience, he would always think of
computers as the most shaida of all mankind's inventions.) But,
he mused, if Bardo really could see the thoughts behind his
face, he had better be careful what he thought. And so, like a
hunter passing into the open-waiting attitude of auvania, Danlo
emptied his mind of everything other than immediate sensa: the
sunlight streaming hot and low through the window; Bardo's
sweetish, flowery scent overlaying the faint sourness of dried
beer; and the slightly curved hollows of stone cupping his
knees. His eyes, blue-black as twilight, focused on infinity,
on the distant spires of the Old City shimmering in the west.
There was a stillness in his eyes, a deep patience and clarity
of vision.
'Danlo!'
'Yes?'
 'Why this mystery?' Bardo huffed out. He grabbed his belly
and bent over so that his face was nearly the same height as
Danlo's. 'I've seen eyes like yours before – tell me, my Wild
Boy, why are you so quiet? What's behind your flawless eyes?'
 Danlo was silent for a long time, and then he finally
confided his fear that Bardo could see his thoughts.
 'That's silly!' Bardo exclaimed. 'Read your thoughts! By God,
I can hardly read my own. Ah, what am I to do with you, Wild
Boy?'
'I do not know,' Danlo said, too truthfully.
'That wasn't a question.'
'It wasn't? But, sir, it sounded like a question.'
229
 'It was a rhetorical question, a question not meant to be
answered.'
'Excuse me,' Danlo said.
  Bardo scratched his moustache and belched. He looked down at
Danlo. 'I know of lotsara because I've studied the Alaloi and
their language – many in the City have. But how do you know?
Ah, that is, how did you come to practise this art of the
burning blood? Who taught you? Your Fravashi sponsor? No, no,
that can't be – the Old Fathers of the Fravashi don't care
about the body arts, do they?'
 The late sun through the window limned Bardo's massive head.
His rings of curly black hair were lustrous with refracted
bronzes and golds. Because the dazzling light hurt Danlo's
eyes, he put his hand to his forehead, squinted and said,
'Sir, you are a man of... rare sensibilities. Would I win your
confidence by betraying another's?'
  Bardo pulled at his thick lower lip. He smiled and said,
'Well, you're really not so impolite after all. You've manners,
strange manners, but manners nonetheless. I like that. I want
you to call me "Master Bardo". Bardo – now that's a name with
a certain euphony, don't you think?'
  'No, Master Bardo.' In truth, Danlo thought his name was
ill-chosen, ominous, and somewhat absurd. It reminded him too
much of the barado, which was the Alaloi word for the confusion
a person's spirit undergoes just after death.
  'No? Well, you needn't be so honest – aren't you afraid of
insulting me?'
Danlo laughed and said, 'No, Master Bardo.'
 'And now you laugh at me again. Ha, what have I done wrong,
that a petitioner isn't afraid of laughing at me?'
'Is that another rhetorical question?'
 'By God, haven't I instructed you not to answer a question
with a question?'
  'Yes, Master Bardo. I ... just wanted to say, you are a
funny man, a kind, compassionate, funny man, and you make me
laugh.'
230
 Bardo's face was flushed as if he'd been drinking beer, and
he rubbed his huge, snow apple of a nose. 'Kind? Compassionate?
Ah, well, perhaps I am,' he admitted. 'You've a talent for the
truth. Everyone knows Bardo has a wit, but it wouldn't do for
boys to laugh at him, do you understand? At me. Now, while
you're being truthful, I must ask you the question you've been
brought here for: Why do you wish to enter the Order? I ask all
the petitioners this question. Your answer may determine
whether you are made a novice – so consider what you say.'
  Danlo looked down and picked at the mortar of the loose,
grey floorstone in front of him. From another part of the
building, down the long corridor outside the room, came the
sound of voices, creaking doors, and bells chiming. The
Sanctuary, with its solemnity and air of hidden activities,
reminded him of Old Father's house. 'I came to Neverness to be
a pilot,' he began. 'A pilot of a lightship. To journey to the
centre of the great circle of stars. I must find a way ... to
go over without actually dying, a way of looking at the
universe, as from the other side. Or inside. Above time, beyond
the starry night, I... I am not saying this well, am I? There
is a Fravashi word, a splendid word: the asarya. You know it,
yes? I have to see where the universe is in harmony and where
it is not before I can affirm it. And I must affirm it, even
where it is ... cold and terrible. If I do not, I shall never
become a full man. Never fully alive.'
  When he had finished telling Bardo that he had descried
signs he would be a pilot, that it was his fate, he sat back on
his heels and winced at the sharp, tearing pain beneath his
kneecaps.
  'Ahhh.' That was all Bardo said at first. He stood with his
back to the window regarding Danlo for a long time. 'Ah, that
is quite an answer! A remarkable answer, even! Do you know what
the other petitioners typically reply when asked why they want
to enter the Order?'
231
'No, Master Bardo.'
  'Well, they say things like: "I want to devote myself to
study and increase the Order's knowledge." Or – and this is the
kind of thing which makes me want to slap their faces – they
tell me: "I want to serve mankind." Liars! They give me these
kinds of answers supposing that's what I want to hear, and all
the time they're thinking that if I accept them into the Order,
their careers are made. What they really want is a life of
fame, power, and glory. As I, Bardo, of all men should know.
But you, you're different, by God! You're not afraid of telling
the naked, fantastic, dangerous truth. You want to become an
asarya! I like that! I like you. Well, Wild Danlo, I shall help
you where I can.'
  Danlo knelt down gripping his knees, and he asked, 'Can you
tell me if I ... survived the tests?'
 Bardo nodded his head. 'It was close, but you acquitted
yourself well enough. You've a curious deficiency in the
universal syntax, but this was outweighed by your sense of
shih. And your mathematics– '
 'I am sorry, sir, but I was able to prove only five of the
theorems.'
  'Well, that's two more theorems than anyone else was able to
prove. You've a talent for mathematics, it seems. I like
mathematical men.'
'I have always ... loved mathematics,' Danlo said.
  'Ah, very well, but will you please remedy your deficiency
in the universal syntax? Otherwise, you'll make Bardo look like
a fool.'
'Why, sir?'
 'Why?' Bardo smiled at him, then, and with his thumb, he
flicked a bead of sweat from his bulging forehead. 'Because the
board has recommended that you be admitted to the Order, and
it's upon me to make the final decision. And I've decided to
make you a novice – did I not just tell you that I'd help you?'
Without thought or hesitation, Danlo leapt to his feet,
232
 flung his arms wide, then jumped into the air. 'Ahira, Ahira!'
he cried out. Tears sprang to his eyes, and he was breathing so
quickly that his fingers began to tingle. He forgot himself and
his etiquette, then, and he fell against Bardo as if he were
his near-father, pressing his forehead to Bardo's chest while
he tried to get his arms around his huge belly in close
embrace.
  'Easy now!' Bardo said as he gently peeled Danlo's hands
from behind his back and pushed him away. He held him by the
shoulder at arm's length. 'Ah, easy there.'
 Danlo tried to catch his breath and gasped out, 'O ...
blessed ... Bardo!'
  'No, no, Master Bardo,' Bardo corrected. Try to remember
your manners.'
 'I am ... sorry,' Danlo said.
  Out of sheer joy, Danlo had been dancing about like a child,
but suddenly he stood still and looked at Bardo. He was tall
for his years, but his forehead was just level with Bardo's
chest, and so he had to tilt his head back in order to engage
Bardo eye to eye. 'May I ask a question, sir?'
'Please, do.'
  'No one has been able to tell me about Hanuman li Tosh, and
I have not been allowed out of the dormitory to visit him. Is
he ... well?'
  With his fingers, Bardo smoothed his moustache and then laid
his heavy hand on Danlo's shoulder. 'Ah, yes, your friend,' he
said. 'A beautiful boy – I've never seen anyone as beautiful,
not even the exemplars of Kaveri Luz. Too bad, too bad. He has
a cancer in his lungs. It's been controlled, but I'm not sure
if he'll ever be really well.'
'Then ... he has not been tested?'
 'Well, there was no need for further tests. Your friend was
almost a graduate of an elite school. We knew the quality of
his mind; it remained only to test his, ah ... patience.'
'Then he will be admitted, too?'
'He already has been. He's a novice now; he took his
233
 vows three days ago. I'm sure he's been assigned to one of the
novice's dormitories.'
 Danlo stepped over to the window and pressed his head against
the cold clary pane. He was happy for Hanuman, but once again
he had been reminded how difficult it was for an outsider such
as himself to enter the Order.
 'Of course,' Bardo continued, 'I asked Hanuman his question,
just as I asked you. About why he wanted to be a novice. Do you
know what he told me? He said that he wanted power, fame and
glory! An honest boy! Of course, I had to admit him after that,
didn't I? Ah, yes, but there's something about him that
unsettles me. He's honest on the surface, but underneath, he
keeps secrets. He's too ambitious, I think. Listen to me, I'm a
keen judge of character, and I know. Be careful of this boy.
I'm not sure he's a good choice for a friend.'
 A sudden gust of wind rattled the window, and Danlo stepped
to the side, beneath the arching stone wall, in case the window
shattered. He said, 'But Master Bardo, I have no choice, now.
We can choose whom to make friends with, yes, but we cannot ...
unchoose them, can we?'
 Bardo pulled at his beard, seemingly lost in his memories.
His voice rumbled out, 'Ah, that's true. So very true. Well, be
friends with him if you must. I'll even have the Head Novice
assign you to his dormitory, if you'd like.'
'Thank you, sir.'
 With a wave of his hand, Bardo motioned toward the door.
'Now, please leave me. I've twenty other petitioners to
interview today. I wish you well, Wild Danlo.'
 The next day Danlo began preparations for taking his vows. His
old clothes, the jacket and trousers he had surrendered in the
Ice Dome, were burned in a private ceremony. He was given new
clothes: a formal white robe, three informal robes,
undergarments, three kamelaikas, a wind jacket and a parka made
of cultured shagshay fur. (And, of course, two pairs of ice
skates and a pair of skis.) All of this apparel
234
 was white, as was the wool cap he was required to wear on his
head at all times. But before he could don the 'Cap of Borja',
as it was called, he had to have his head shaved. This posed
something of a problem as Danlo placed great value on his long,
flowing black hair. In fact, as an Alaloi man, he was not
permitted to cut his hair – otherwise it would have been
impossible for him to fasten and display Ahira's white tail
feather in the proper manner. 'All novices must shave their
heads,' Bardo said to Danlo. 'Why are you so goddamned
stubborn?' After a long, confusing discussion in which Danlo
spoke of Ahira and the meaning of the feather he wore in his
hair, Bardo decided that he was a remarkably superstitious boy
who had adopted certain of the Alaloi's unfathomable, barbaric
religious beliefs. And although Bardo himself eschewed a
personal God or any formal notions as to how a man should
relate to the godhead, he, as Master of Novices, was required
to respect all of humanity's religions, even the most
totalitarian and bizarre. He remembered that, twenty years ago,
a Jewish novice had been permitted to wear a black skullcap
called a yarmulke underneath the wool cap of Borja. True, many
revered (or ridiculed) Judaism as the oldest of religions – Old
Earth's ur-religion whose origins dated back at least four
thousand years before the Swarming. But, Bardo reasoned, if
exceptions in custom could be made for an archaic Jew, he could
certainly arrange a compromise with a wild boy who believed
that a stupid white bird could hold half of his soul. And so,
in the end, a compromise was reached: Danlo submitted to a high
novice who cut his hair and lathered the stubble with a
rose-scented shaving soap. All of his scalp was shaved except
for a round circle of hair at the back of his head. In the
manner of the Chinese warlords of Old Earth, he wore a queue of
black hair dangling halfway down his back. The queue was long
and thick like the tail of a muskox; although some of the
novices made jokes about it, Danlo was very proud to keep
Ahira's shining feather bound to his hair.
235
  A few days later Danlo finally took his vows. That year only
twenty-seven petitioners were admitted to Borja. Seventeen
girls and nine boys, all of them from obscure planets whose
names were unfamiliar to Danlo, took their vows along with him
and were assigned to the various dormitories. Danlo was
delighted to be assigned to the same dormitory as was Hanuman,
Penhallegon Hall, one of thirty-three boys' dormitories at the
very northeastern corner of Borja. It was among the oldest of
the Academy's buildings and was nicknamed 'Perilous Hall', with
good reason: over the millennia more than a few hapless boys
had perished within its granite walls. Its interior was stark
and austere, four storeys of cut stone connected by a spiral of
open, winding stairs. The stairs themselves were thin, fanlike
slabs of basalt which had been transported from Arcite along
with the other stones of the building; the stairs were chipped
and worn, wickedly uneven and in many places canted off the
horizontal at odd angles so that it was all too easy to catch
the heel of one's boot and slip. Many boys had injured
themselves tumbling down these stairs, or in a few cases, had
plummeted a hundred feet over the inner edge of the stairs'
spiral, down the stairwell's central core to their deaths. It
was an everlasting scandal that no banister or retaining wall
had ever been built to prevent such accidents. But the founder
of the Order, the infamous Horthy Hosthoh, had thought to train
novices to mindfulness and care. And so, because the Order
honoured its traditions no matter how archaic or foolish, for
three thousand years novices had carefully picked their way up
and down these terrible stairs many times each day. It was
something of a miracle that in all that time, only twenty or
thirty boys had lost their lives in falls.
  Like each of Perilous Hall's new novices, Danlo was assigned
a bed on the topmost floor. One afternoon while the other boys
were out taking their skating lessons, Danlo climbed the spiral
stairs to find an open space of high ceiling arches and many
windows set into the thick stone
236
 walls. (In truth, the fourth floor was the grandest of all the
dormitory's floors, but it was also the most exhausting and
dangerous to reach. Hence the newest of novices were made to
trudge up to its heights, while the second year novices
occupied the next floor, and so on down to the first floor
where the high novices resided.) In the main chamber, lined up
against the windows in two long rows, there were twenty
platform beds. Only one of them was unclaimed, and Danlo stowed
his clothing and skates in the large wooden trunk he found at
the foot of the bed. His shakuhachi went into the trunk too,
carefully wrapped in one of his informal robes. By rule,
novices were allowed no possessions other than their clothing;
by practice almost everyone kept one or two treasured items
hidden in his trunk. After Danlo had made his bed, he lay atop
white blankets and looked up. The twenty ceiling arches
reminded him of a whale's skeleton, thick ribs of mortared
stone spaced evenly down the length of the room. The arches
supported a latticework of shatterwood roof beams, many of
which were splintered and cracked. Danlo immediately liked the
feeling of this chamber, especially the smells of old wood and
sunlight streaming against woollen blankets. He liked the way
sounds fell from ceiling to floor when he impulsively unwrapped
and played his shakuhachi; perhaps because of its age, the vast
chamber seemed to reverberate with memories and a quality of
aliveness at odds with its cold austerity.
  Later that morning, Danlo saw Hanuman li Tosh for the first
time since their ordeal in Lavi Square. He came into the room
with eighteen other chattering, raucous, boot-stomping boys. By
good chance, he happened to have the bed next to Danlo's. He
came over to Danlo and smiled nicely. 'I haven't thanked you
for saving my life,' he said. 'I was afraid I'd never see you
again.'
  He stood shifting his weight from foot to foot next to
Danlo's bed. His fingers were moving like spider's legs against
one another; he seemed intensely kinetic and rest-
237
less, as if he were unsure what his new friendship with Danlo
would require of him. Danlo thought that he must still be sick
inside, though probably no one noticed this but him. Indeed,
Hanuman seemed much changed. Gone was his racking cough, his
fever, the deathly pallor of one who was ready to die. Gone,
too, was the hair from his head; his shaved scalp was as white
as an alaya shell. Like the other novices, he wore an informal
robe with a casual grace, as if he had been born to the
garments of the Order. Much of the delicateness seemed to have
fallen away from his beautiful face, though with his head
shaved, his cheek bones stood out more prominently, and his
eyes appeared even more vivid and haunting than Danlo had
remembered.
 Shaida eyes, he thought for the thousandth time. And then he
remembered that Hanuman was his friend, and he embraced him
fiercely and cried out, 'Hanu, Hanu, I am glad you are alive!'
  Danlo's open, unrestrained joy obviously pleased Hanuman,
although from the stiffness of Hanuman's body, Danlo
immediately understood that he did not like to be touched. It
was this way with most civilized people, as Danlo well knew,
and so, even as he let go of Hanuman, he paid too little
attention to the look of alarm on Hanuman's face.
  The other novices gathered around their beds, then. They had
witnessed Danlo's feat of lotsara in the Square, and they were
eager to meet him.
 And Hanuman was quite proud to make introductions. 'Danlo,'
he said, 'may I present Sherborn of Darkmoon?' And then there
was a wariness in Hanuman's voice as he introduced a small boy
with almond eyes and a quick, sardonic face. 'And Madhava li
Shing? Madhava's uncle was a master akashic, and his granduncle
as well.'
  In turn, as Hanuman presented each of the novices, Danlo
inclined his head and bowed in the proper manner. And the boys
bowed to him, with too perfect a punctilio.
238
 Each of them was new to Borja, but each, like Hanuman, had
studied in the elite schools of the Order. Each boy took
extreme pride in being of this elite; by duty and by training
no one was obviously impolite to Danlo. But as a group, they
were at once disdainful of him as a lowly petitioner and
envious of his instant fame. They kept a distance between
themselves and Danlo, a physical distance of bare floorstones
and a psychic distance of suspicious glances, awe and a
fragile, false superiority. No one wanted to exchange smiles
with him or greet him eye to eye. He was popular, true, but his
was the popularity of a strange new alien confined in fear and
ignorance to a zoo. Only Hanuman accepted Danlo in friendship.
He stood by Danlo's side, and he was unafraid to let the others
know that he had nothing but contempt for their manner. It cut
Danlo's heart, the way Hanuman stood apart from his peers,
staring at them with his pale, icy eyes.
 Because it was the beginning of the Academy's year, none of
the novices had yet been assigned tutors, schedules, or duties.
Danlo spent the rest of the afternoon in uneasy conversation
with Madhava li Shing and others, fending off questions as to
his origins. After an awkward supper in the first floor dining
room (all of the novices, high and low, took their meals
together), Danlo and Hanuman raced up the stairs to the fourth
floor where they played chess together. Hanuman had a fine, old
chess set made on Yarkona. The black pieces were sculpted of
shatterwood, while the white pieces were of ivory, and the set
was valuable and quite rare. Hanuman's grandfather had given it
to him when he was only eight years old; Hanuman had always
treasured it, and it was one of the few things he had brought
with him to Neverness. When Hanuman set up the pieces for the
first game, Danlo saw that the white god was missing. In its
place, Hanuman had substituted a salt shaker, which was
perfectly adequate for their games. But it troubled Danlo that
the harmony of the set had been broken, and he was aggrieved to
learn
239
that the god had not been lost but stolen. As Hanuman explained
– haltingly, choking on his anger – his father had never
approved of the gift. To carve a chess piece as a god, his
father claimed, symbolized the heresy that hakras (or humans)
could become as true gods. It was a crime as well, pure
blasphemy toward Ede the God, and on the night of Hanuman's
eleventh birthday his father had confiscated the white god as a
lesson in piety. 'My grandfather was a Worthy Architect, if not
a reader,' Hanuman said. 'He saw nothing wrong with giving me
the set. But my father always had his own interpretation of
doctrine. He was always so strict.' After Hanuman had won three
games in a row, Danlo returned to his bed to play his
shakuhachi. Once, just after he had played a particularly sad
passage, Hanuman shot a swift look at him. It lasted only an
instant, this acid, apprehensive look, but Danlo immediately
felt the deep understanding that flowed between them, as if
they were the only ones in the room touched by his music.
   Later that evening, in the bathing room just off the main
chamber, an incident occurred that would further deepen the way
Danlo and Hanuman saw each other. The boys were taking their
nightly baths and shaving each other's heads; the room smelled
of mildew, sweat and fragrant shaving soaps. Due to the
continual jets of hot water piped in from the geysers beneath
the City, the air roiled with steam. The small, arched windows
were misted over, and drops of water wormed their way down the
wall tiles. Danlo was sitting crosslegged by the edge of the
hot pool, gagging on lungfuls of steam, while next to him,
Madhava li Shing drew a diamond-edged razor across Hanuman's
scalp. Suddenly, Madhava nicked Hanuman, and blood streamed
from a cut on the side of his head. It was only a small wound,
but Hanuman clapped his hand to it, and he gasped for air, and
his eyes locked onto the black and white floor tiles as if he
could discern a meaning to the pattern there that was lost on
all the others.
240
 'Excuse me,' Madhava said. He moved over to one of the shaving
basins, where he held the bloody razor beneath a spout of
steaming water.
 'It's not your fault,' Hanuman finally said. 'No one here has
been taught how to shave another properly.'
   At this, Madhava stiffened up and said, 'I'm sorry. I'll get
some glue.'
   'Oh, no,' Hanuman said. 'I'm sorry. I'm sorry I let my ill
mood get in the way of my tongue. Please, won't you finish
shaving me?'
  Hanuman went on to explain that he detested the daily routine
of head shaving because it reminded him of one of the rituals
of his own church. All the Worthy Architects of the Cybernetic
Reformed Churches were required to shave their heads, a
practice called 'the little sacrifice'. Ironically, he had fled
his parents' religion for the supposed sanity of the Order,
only to discover that he must daily sacrifice his hair not to
Ede the God, but to an arbitrary tradition whose beginnings no
one remembered.
 Just then, as Madhava began his work anew and Hanuman
clenched his teeth at the razor scraping across his skull,
Pedar Sadi Sanat and three other high novices stomped into the
room. They were each bigger than any of the first year novices,
and they were dressed in kamelaikas as if they had just come in
out of the cold. They lined up in front of the hot pool,
posturing their bulky bodies to intimidate Hanuman and Danlo.
It was bad chance, for Hanuman's mood, already turbid and dark,
fell instantly black, and he exchanged quick looks with Danlo.
Pedar, of course, noticed this look, which seemed to enrage
him. 'Stand up, won't you!' he called out. 'Hanuman li Tosh and
Danlo the Wild – we've come to greet you, so you could at least
stand and greet us properly.'
  Together, almost as if their muscles were connected to a
common nerve, Danlo and Hanuman stood up at the edge of the hot
pool. Danlo was taller than Hanuman and, with his tendons and
muscles twisting like snakes along
241
his limbs, much stronger looking. In truth, Hanuman had yet to
get his growth, and his body was small and undefined, more
like a boy's than a man's. They were both naked and very aware
of their nakedness.
 'Welcome to Perilous Hall!' Pedar said. 'We've been waiting
for you.'
 Pedar apologized for missing the evening meal earlier; he
cited his and his friends' exploits with four whores as reason
for his absence from the supper table. Then he strode back and
forth in front of Danlo and Hanuman, surveying their bodies.
He glanced at his friends behind him, and shook his head. Of
the four high novices (indeed, of all the boys in the
dormitory) Pedar was the oldest, and his face was the most
bepimpled. As he picked at his face, his little eyes were
pointed like pustules at Danlo. There was a devoutness to
cruelty in his eyes, a festering diligence and resentment.
Danlo remembered Pedar's taunts during the ordeal in Lavi
Square; he remembered Pedar kicking ice in his face and how
Master Bardo had cuffed him in punishment, and he suddenly
realized that Hanuman (and he, as well) had been assigned to
Pedar's dormitory by something other than chance.
 'Well, it's the Boy of Ice,' Pedar said. 'Welcome, welcome!
The Head Novice was reluctant to assign you here, but we
persuaded him that we'd be honoured by the illustriousness of
your presence.'
  Again, Hanuman looked at Danlo, and Danlo didn't like the
way Hanuman's face emptied of all emotion.
  Pedar stamped his boots against the wet tile. He snapped his
fingers at Danlo and said, 'Can't you face me, Wild Boy? Soon
enough, it will be the Day of Submission, and then you'll have
to face me when I speak to you.'
 Danlo turned to face Pedar squarely, and Hanuman did too.
Behind them the hot pool gurgled and steamed, and Danlo felt
drops of water spraying up against his legs.
 'Please go away,' Hanuman said suddenly. His usually clear
voice sounded grey and dead. 'When the Day of
242
 Submission comes, we'll submit. But now, please leave us
alone.'
 At this, Pedar bent his neck and began knocking at the side
of his head as if he had water in his ear. To his friends he
said, 'I'm not hearing properly. I thought one of these worms
asked me to leave.'
  'Yes, please leave,' Danlo said. He blinked at the steam
irritating his eyes. Many of the boys, he saw, were wading in
the cold pool nearby. Sherborn of Darkmoon and Leander Morven,
and others, were frozen like snow hares, watching them,
listening.
  'Look at you!' Pedar shouted. He pointed at Danlo's loins,
directing everyone's attention there. Despite himself, Danlo
looked down at the long scar on his thigh, where the silk belly
boar had once gored him; the scar glistened hard and white and
looked like a spear of ice pointing upward towards his membrum.
Everyone was now staring at his membrum, at the circumcized
bulb and at the round ochre and indigo scars decorating the
shaft. 'What have you been doing to yourself, Wild Boy?' Pedar
asked. 'Or did a whore bite off your foreskin and tattoo the
meat?'
  Hanuman obviously couldn't bear for Danlo to be insulted
this way, for he clenched his fists and eased into the first
attitude of his killing art.
  But Pedar just laughed at him and snapped his fingers in the
direction of Hanuman's membrum. 'And look at you! You're just
a little boy. Is that a noodle you have there or a worm? What
do little boys do with their little worms, I wonder?'
  Now Hanuman was trembling all over, his hard little muscles
dancing along his arms and thighs. His teeth were clenched,
and his belly worked in and out as he struggled to breathe.
Madhava li Shing, who had prudently edged away from the hot
pool and was swishing his razor in a water basin ten feet
away, looked at him and called out, 'Be careful, Hanuman. It's
immediate dismissal if you strike a high novice.'
243
Danlo, standing next to Hanuman shoulder to shoulder, could
almost feel the sick heat of adrenalin shooting through
Hanuman's body. He brought his hand up to his mouth and
whispered, 'No, Hanu, no.'
 These words seemed to cool Hanuman's heart, for he relaxed
his hands and slowly turned around so that his back was facing
Pedar.
 'If you ever strike me, it will mean more than your
dismissal,' Pedar said to him. 'Look at me when I speak to
you!'
 But Hanuman just stared at the hot pool, and he would not
turn his head.
  'Damn you!' Pedar screamed. Very quickly, before Danlo
realized what was happening, Pedar lashed out and cuffed
Hanuman on the side of his head. The blow almost knocked
Hanuman over. It opened up the cut on his scalp, and blood
streamed down his temple and dripped from his earlobe.
  'No!' Danlo said. It was only the second time in his life
that he had seen one person strike another. He was afraid that
Pedar might strike Hanuman again, so he moved between Pedar
and Hanuman, and he said, 'No.'
 Pedar, however, must have understood that he had gone too
far. He began picking at his pimply face as if he were
regretful of his loss of control, if not actually ashamed of
his actions. He bowed to Danlo and said, 'When the Day of
Submission comes, what a choice I shall have: the Wild Boy or
the Worm. I wonder – which one of you will submit to me? You
may think about this during the next three tendays.'
  So saying, he nodded at his friends and led them from the
room. The sound of their boots seemed to echo through the
adjoining sleeping chamber long after they were gone.
 While Madhava and the other boys began speaking in hushed
tones of the Day of Submission, Danlo turned to see Hanuman
still staring at the hot pool. He stood perfectly
 244
still, and his eyes were like perfect mirrors turned inward
upon himself.
 'Hanu, your blessed head – it is bleeding,' Danlo said. As
they stood there breathing steam, drops of blood gathered at
the tip of Hanuman's earlobe; they built into large red beads
that splashed down against his shoulder and rolled across his
pale chest.
 'Hanu, Hanu, if you are afraid of– '
 'Go away,' Hanuman suddenly said. 'Please go away.'
 'But your head is bleeding,' Danlo repeated. As a child, he
had been taught that wounds must be tended to promptly, and so
he reached out to examine the cut on Hanuman's temple. But the
instant that his fingers touched the bloodstained skin, Hanuman
jumped as if he'd been touched with lightning.
  'No!' Hanuman said. He jerked his head back and turned to
face Danlo. 'Leave me alone!'
 Again, Danlo stretched out his hand to Hanuman, this time to
touch his forehead, to touch away the anger that he had
unwittingly aroused. It was a quintessential Alaloi gesture, an
act of reconciliation and kindness, but it was the wrong thing
to do. Suddenly, with a remarkable power for one so slight,
Hanuman hammered the edge of his fist against Danlo's arm,
knocking it away. A sharp pain shot up Danlo's forearm into his
elbow; he could hardly move his arm, so deep was the shock of
nerves compressed against bone. Something happened to Hanuman,
then. In striking Danlo, it was as if he had unlocked a door to
a room that should never have been opened. Again, he struck out
at Danlo, with his feet and his knees and his fists. Danlo
moved closer to him to fend off these blows, or to grab his
wrists and shake him back to his senses. As Danlo grappled with
Hanuman, hand to hand, hand to neck, he became aware of many
things at once: the sound of falling water, boys gathering
around him, gesticulating and shouting through a thick veil of
steam, the soapy tiles slick beneath his feet, and most of all,
the terrible thing.
245
the madness running wild in Hanuman's pale eyes. This madness
seemed to come out of nowhere, like lava welling up from a rent
in the ground. At first, Danlo thought that Hanuman had fallen
into a blind rage, like that of a rabid dog slavering and
snapping and slashing at anything that came his way; perhaps,
Danlo told himself, Hanuman had mistaken him for Pedar, or
mistaken his remembrance of the recent past for the reality of
the present moment. And then he bumped foreheads with Hanuman,
and they locked eyes together, and he knew that this was not
so. In truth, he had somehow violated Hanuman's person in a way
that Pedar had not. He didn't know, in his mind, what he had
done to unleash such fury. But another part of him knew, and he
knew it deeply, and even in his madness Hanuman knew it too.
Again and again, he struck Danlo, wilfully, knowingly, as if he
had freely accepted the part of himself that was pure energy
and annihilation. Much later, when Danlo was able to remember
events exactly, this image of Hanuman so clear-eyed and aware
would haunt him. But now there was only fury, elbows and fists,
drops of blood flung out into the steamy air. Hanuman's face
was terrible with concentration as he kicked at Danlo and fell
into the motions of his killing art. Hanuman punched him hard
in the belly; he drove his knee into his exposed membrum and
stones. There was a pain then, a quick, blinding agony that
jumped along Danlo's spine and left him gasping for air. He
doubled over, and as he fell he kept a hold on Hanuman's neck
and pulled him closer. They fell together, hard, down against
the tiles edging the hot pool. Something – the tile or perhaps
Hanuman's fist – struck Danlo's chin. His teeth cracked
together, and he bit his tongue and tasted blood, and suddenly
he was in the water holding Hanuman's head tightly against his
chest. The water burned his skin and sloshed into his mouth as
he panted in pain. He choked on the water, and he might have
gone under, then, clutching at his groin and belly like a
wounded beast. Even
246
 though the water was shallow, no higher than his belly, he
might have breathed water and drowned. Death is the left hand
of life, his body seemed to cry out, and with death close at
hand, as he choked and thrashed in the burning water, he felt a
great surge of life running strong as an ocean inside him. It
was his anima deep within the cells of brain and blood, a pure
will to life beyond the agony in his groin, beyond hatred,
shock, or pain. In a way, fighting for life was a fusion of
both terror and joy. He found his feet, suddenly. He gasped for
air, and blood sprayed from his mouth. He was still holding
Hanuman by the neck. And Hanuman was still fighting furiously,
clawing at Danlo's throat and trying to hook his fingers into
his eyes. Many times when he was younger, in the cave of his
ancestors, Danlo had wrestled with other boys, but never like
this, never with such wildness and abandon. And now he was as
wild as any sea animal, and he felt the strength of his life
flowing along his arms. He was stronger than Hanuman. With the
water dragging heavy against their legs, neither of them could
move freely, but Danlo was taller and much stronger. He got an
arm up and wrestled behind Hanuman; he held him fast in a head
lock with Hanuman's face inches above the churning water.
 Life is the right hand of death – he thought someone was
saying these words, but then he realized that it was Madhava or
one of the other boys standing by the edge of the pool,
shouting, 'Let him go, you're killing him!'
 He tightened his grip on the back of Hanuman's head. The
scalp was slippery with hot water and blood, and he felt fine
stubbles of hair that Madhava had missed shaving. By chance,
his fingertips edged the bleeding gash along Hanuman's temple.
Beneath his fingertips was bone and brain, and beneath
everything, stiffening Hanuman's frail body like sheets of ice,
fear. Hanuman's body was rigid with fear; he, too, was fighting
to live, and Danlo could not quite force his face beneath the
water. He knew he
247
should kill Hanuman there and then, in the moment, with the
passion for killing so urgent inside him. He was an Alaloi man
(or half a man), and killing was a terrible necessity of life.
But he could not kill him. In the water beneath him, blood from
his bitten tongue spread out into hundreds of silken red
strands, and strand to strand, touched Hanuman's blood. He saw
the deep correspondence that existed between them. In the
surging waves beating against his chest, through the hot,
churning water he felt a connectedness to Hanuman that could
never be broken. Tat tvam asi, he thought, that thou art. All
things were connected to all things, heart to heart and atom to
atom, and in every part of Hanuman – in the pain of his
twisting, thrashing body and in his frantic eyes – Danlo saw
himself. He could not harm Hanuman without harming himself. It
is better to die oneself than kill He thought of Old Father's
teaching of ahimsa, then, and he knew that he could not kill
him; he could not kill anything, ever again.
'Hanu, Hanu,' he said, gasping, 'be still!'
'No! Leave me alone!'
  Danlo stood behind Hanuman with the boy's head clamped in
his long hands. His tongue hurt on the side where he had bitten
it, and it was hard for him to speak clearly. 'Hanu, Hanu, ti
alashareth la shantih. Be still! I am your friend, not your
enemy!'
'Go away.'
 Again Danlo prayed, 'Ti alashareth la shantih,' and he held
his hand over Hanuman's mouth. After a while the madness went
out of Hanuman, and he fell still. Danlo held him tightly, his
chest pressing the rib bones of Hanuman's slender back; he felt
this stillness as an unexpected letting-go that passed from
Hanuman's flesh into his own. Although Danlo could not know it,
it was the first time since Hanuman's infancy that he had
relaxed in the presence of another. Something passed between
them, then, a deep trust that neither of them would ever again
harm the other.
 248
 'Why did you strike me?' Danlo whispered. 'I am your friend,
not your enemy.'
  Hanuman struggled to speak, and Danlo let his hand fall away
from Hanuman's face, into the rolling water. Hot waves lapped
at his fingers. From somewhere above him, through the steamy
air, came the sound of feet slapping against wet tile and one
of the boys shouting at them. 'Hit him again!' someone cried
out. 'Hold his face under water until he drowns!'
 'Be quiet!' Madhava li Shing said. 'Be quiet, or the high
novices will hear us and throw us in the pool.'
  But most of the boys were not calling for further violence.
In truth, they seemed in awe of what they had just witnessed.
They stared down at Danlo and Hanuman as if they were afraid
for these two wild boys to emerge from the pool.
  Danlo ignored their chatter and whispered in Hanuman's ear,
'What is wrong?'
 'Oh, no,' Hanuman began, and his voice was lost to the sound
of water running into the pool. 'I'm sorry – are you hurt?'
  Danlo let Hanuman go. While Madhava li Shing called for them
to come out of the pool, they faced each other across the
water. 'I think ... I bit my tongue,' Danlo said.
 'I'm sorry I hurt you.' Hanuman laved some water over his
bleeding scalp, then said, 'But I thought you wanted to kill
me.'
 'Kill you?'
  'I should explain,' Hanuman said. He looked down at the hot
water for a moment. 'I should explain, but I'm sorry, I can't
talk here, with everyone listening. Can you wait until after
everyone has gone to bed?'
  Danlo reached back and pulled his queue of hair so it fell
over his shoulder across his chest. Ahira's tail feather, he
saw, was somewhat torn and bedraggled; only the wax he had
rubbed into it each day since his passage into
 249
 manhood had kept it from ruin. 'Yes,' he said as he pressed
his fingers against the feather's hard quill. 'I can wait.'
  Later, after Madhava had glued Hanuman's scalp wound closed
with a pungent-smelling collagen, after Borja's evening bells
long since had rung and the cold flame globes had darkened and
everyone was asleep, much later, Danlo and Hanuman stole from
their beds and made their way to the centre of the sleeping
chamber. There the stairwell opened before them like a black
hole in space. They crept down a few stairs, not so far as to
emerge into the chamber below where the second year novices
slept, but far enough so that the thick stone floor above them
would muffle their voices.
  'I'm sorry I struck you,' Hanuman murmured into the
darkness. 'I didn't mean to. It's just that I was so mad, and
afraid. There's something about you. Your strength, your past,
your courage, and – forgive me – your strangeness. You were
going to touch my face, weren't you? My head. It's silly of me
to be so bound by my past, but on Catava, no one ever touches
anyone else, if they can help it. You must think this
inhibition is odious. I do, when I think about it. I know I
should overcome myself. I want to, I will. Oh, this is hard. It
seems so indecent to talk about myself this way. So
vainglorious. I think about myself too much, anyway. But I have
to believe we have complete will over ourselves. If we're
completely mindful. There's something about me, too, I know.
And knowing it, I can control it. I'd never strike you again.
Please. I'd rather die than hurt you.'
 Danlo listened to Hanuman's voice spilling like liquid silver
out of the darkness. He could hear the truth in the words, as
well as an immense sadness; he sensed that Hanuman was afraid
to be alone with himself, and worse, he seemed to be always
watching himself, as if he were standing guard against a
murderer who slips through open windows during the night. If
Danlo had been prudent, he might have accepted Hanuman's
apology – only to flee
 250
into that frigidness of the soul that people betray when they
wish to sever an awkward or dangerous friendship. But this
Danlo could not do. Because of his experience with the
Dreamers – or perhaps due to the terrible things he had seen
when his tribe fell ill in their brains – he had an immense
tolerance for madness. And so he smiled to himself as Hanuman
talked; he sat on the cold stone steps and listened as Hanuman
told him things that no one else had ever known.
  'I'm sorry I struck your face,' Hanuman said at last. 'And
the groin strike – are you all right?'
 'Yes,' Danlo said. He reached beneath his robe, down between
his legs as if to reassure himself that he was still whole.
'Now my stones have been hammered to match the cutting of my
membrum.'
 'I'm sorry – I've wounded you.'
 Danlo was faintly nauseous due to his aching groin and the
minty, collagenous odour of the glue wafting from Hanuman's
head. On the dark stairs where they sat, the smells and sounds
around them seemed very close. 'Wounds heal,' he said.
  Hanuman was silent for a long time before whispering, 'Ilove
him whose soul is deep, even in being wounded, and who can
perish of a small experience: thus he goes gladly over the
world.'
 'You are quoting from your blessed book again, yes?'
 'Some things are impossible to say otherwise.'
 'You can say anything to a friend,' Danlo told him.
 'Are we to be friends?'
  'O blessed Hanu! We have been friends since the first day.
Friendship is halla, like the circle of the world. It cannot be
broken.'
  In the quiet of the stairwell where their whispers fell out
into the open blackness, in friendship, they touched each
other's forehead. For a long time they sat there talking about
their lives and their fates. Because Danlo trusted Hanuman to
keep secrets, he told him of his quest to affirm
251
 life wherever he found it. 'Life,' he confided, 'is so
strange, so splendid, so rare. To see it, quickening, life.
This is what my Fravashi Old Father has taught: never killing
or hurting any living thing, not even in one's thoughts. To
affirm life this way, utterly, with all one's spirit – this
must be a way to becoming an asarya, yes?'
  They returned to the main chamber, then, and Danlo lay awake
listening to the wind outside and to the breathing of nineteen
boys sleeping down the length of the room. Far into the night,
in the bed next to his, Hanuman began tossing and murmuring in
his sleep. He had fallen into one of his nightmares. 'No, no,
Father!' he called out. 'No, no, no!'
 Danlo kicked the blankets off himself and stepped over to
Hanuman. The floor stones were icy against his bare feet, so he
knelt on Hanuman's bed. Starlight silvered the windows above
them and fell in faint streamers into the room. Hanuman's pale,
delicate face was rigid with suffering. With life, Danlo
thought, and in the Alaloi manner, he gently pressed his hand
over the boy's mouth. 'You must not wake the others!' he
whispered. 'Shhh, mi alasharia la, shantih, shantih. Go to
sleep now, my brother, go to sleep.'
252



CHAPTER EIGHT

The Doctrine of Ahimsa

 They live in wisdom who see themselves in all and all in .
 – from The Bhagavad Gita

 In the uncertain first days of their novitiate that followed,
Danlo and Hanuman became best of friends. As friends do, Danlo
chose to blind himself to the worst of Hanuman's faults while
cherishing those rare qualities which distinguished him from
the other novices: his mindfulness, his intense will and his
loyalty. Hanuman, once he had accepted Danlo as a friend,
proved astonishingly loyal. On the sunny glidderies of Borja,
in the dormitories, or in Lavi Square where the people swarmed
the ice after breakfast, Hanuman championed Danlo to the other
novices. With charm, wit, and subtle intimidation (no one,
after witnessing Hanuman's ferocity in the bathing room, wanted
to provoke him to violence), he won a tentative acceptance for
Danlo. It helped that Danlo was easy to like and that he liked
to laugh at himself, even when the others pointed out his
various peculiarities. Indeed, in many of his habits and daily
devotions, Danlo gave the others much to laugh at. Each morning
he arose with the sun, went outside into the frozen air and
bowed to the four points of the world. And each night, just
before the cold flame globes were extinguished, he bent low,
grunting as he lifted his bed and turned it perpendicular to
Hanuman's bed. He did this so he could sleep with his head to
the north; the other boys slept toward the windows oriented
west to east, and
253
 Danlo knew (or believed) that such sleeping positions could
lead to blood diseases, constipation, or even madness. Because
he also believed it was harmful to hold his water, whenever he
felt the need, he insisted on promptly pissing to the south,
whether or not proper lavatory facilities were at hand. Once, a
master horologe caught him outside behind the College of Lords
drilling yellow holes in a gliddery's red ice, and his
reputation for eccentricity was established. This reputation
grew to almost mythic proportions when, one day before dinner,
he forgot his promise to himself in the hot pool and ate the
larvae of a fritillary butterfly. It was an easy enough mistake
for him to make: after a long day of learning to use the
tutelary computers in the library, he was talking with Madhava
li Shing and some other novices outside that most massive of
buildings. He was tired and hungry, and so, without really
thinking, he had peeled open the bark of a shatterwood tree to
find three fat fritillary larvae, each as thick as his thumb.
Out of habit he had scooped these delicacies out of their
burrow and popped them into his mouth before realizing that he
had vowed never to harm another living creature. Since he had
already killed them with his teeth and it would be a shame to
waste a mouthful of good meat, he swallowed the larvae. He had
eaten the young of the fritillary a thousand times during his
boyhood; they tasted delicious, juicy and sweet, just as they
should.
  'You eat worms?' Madhava had asked him. His little face was
screwed up with disgust and horror. And awe – he was awestruck
that Danlo could eat living meat. He had come from one of the
made-worlds of Enola Luz, where the only living things are
human beings and the bacteria grown to feed them; he couldn't
see the difference between an insect and a worm.
  'No,' Danlo said. 'I mean to say, yes, I used to eat them,
before I knew how terrible it is to kill, but today I was so
hungry and I forgot. I ... forgot.' And then his voice fell
254
 low as he whispered a prayer for the larval fritillaries'
spirits, 'Liliji, mi alasharia la shantih.'
 But Madhava didn't understand, and to the horror of all
present, he exclaimed, 'Danlo the Wild eats worms!'
   Ironically, this insect eating was to gain for Danlo a
reputation as a man of peace. To Madhava – and to the other
boys – Danlo was forced to confess what he had so far kept to
himself: that he had made a vow of ahimsa. Many, of course,
knew about the Fravashi and their doctrines; Sherborn of
Darkmoon asked Danlo outright if he had been a student of the
Fravashi. Danlo, who did not like to lie, could not answer this
question directly. Instead he talked about the nature of
beliefs and belief systems in general. While admitting that he
had adopted one of the Fravashi's crucial beliefs, he said that
ahimsa was no mere doctrine, but rather a perception of the
universe that had been interpreted and stated as a belief. This
perception is what matters,' Danlo said. The interconnectedness
of all things. Ahimsa is seeing this connection. But sometimes
... one forgets to see.'
 Soon after this, all the first year novices were informed as
to whom they would serve beginning on 65th day, the dreaded
Day of Submission. As Danlo had feared, it would be his
'pleasure' to serve Pedar Sadi Sanat. Pedar, it was said, was
on friendly terms with the Head Novice, who normally made such
assignations; Pedar must have persuaded him that he was the
novice most qualified to teach Danlo the ideals of obedience
and submission. Surprisingly, however, Hanuman had been called
to serve the Master of Novices himself, Bardo the Just. Such
service was not without precedent, but it was unusual: first
year novices most often are required to serve the older
novices, just as the second and third year novices serve
journeymen, and high novices look after the needs of the
masters. (Many of the high novices escape servitude to an
individual master by volunteering to work in cafes and bars
throughout the City, but, because of their age, this was
255
 not yet a path open to either Hanuman or Danlo.) Hanuman had
heard that Master Bardo was not an easy man to serve, and he
wondered why he had been so honoured. He didn't know – then –
that Bardo liked beautiful boys, and more, that Bardo felt
guilty for nearly causing Hanuman's death in Lavi Square and
was moved to protect him from high novices such as Pedar. From
the first, Danlo worried over Hanuman's assignation to Master
Bardo, just as he worried over and hated the whole system of
submission. Nothing Hanuman said could relieve Danlo of this
hatred. After Hanuman wryly observed that all societies are
based on reciprocity, on an exchange of duties, information,
and favours, Danlo said, 'A mother suckles her child, and a
father must bring blood-tea to the old grandfathers who have
lost their teeth, but it is wrong for a man to serve another
who is whole and strong. That is worse than parasitism; that
is shaida.'
  As Danlo counted the days until the Day of Submission, he
began his formal studies. In accord with Master Bardo's advice,
Danlo began to learn the universal syntax, and he soon found
that his days were busy. In the early morning, after breakfast
and his thought primaries were completed, he did his hardest
work. He went to a notationist to study the three-dimensional
mental symbols called ideoplasts. Late mornings were spent in
memorization: there were twenty-three thousand basic
ideoplasts, and he had to be able to visualize their shapes,
colours, and configurations. He might have imprinted much of
this knowledge, but after his experience in Drisana's shop, he
had come to mistrust the unnatural act of imprinting, if not
imprimaturs themselves. Then too, imprinting had its dangers,
not the least of which was the temptation to stive the brain
full of too many data and facts. Indeed, the women and men of
the Order disdain either memorizing or imprinting more than is
needful; the ideal is to acquire a certain repertoire of basics
before learning the skilful use of computers as extensional
minds and memories. And so Danlo acquired
256
this basic repertoire the long way, passing endless strings of
ideoplasts before his mind's eye, burning the pretty symbols
into his brain at a truly prodigious rate. After this gruelling
memory work came a quick meal of fruit, bread and pulses, and
then, for most of the afternoon until it was time to play
hokkee or skate figures in the Ice Dome, he returned to the
universal syntax, learning representation theory,
formalization, modelling, and applications. Only during the
evenings did he have time to talk and laugh with the other
boys, to play chess with Hanuman or lie back on the rough white
blankets of his bed and play the shakuhachi.
  Besides the universal syntax, of course, the novices are
required to learn a varied curriculum: history of the Order,
Order etiquette, mathematics, science, history, skating, body
yoga, languages, library arts, and the Fravashi thought
exercises. And the cetic arts: hallning, zazen, meditation,
fugue and the interface with the cybernetic spaces. Toward the
end of his Borja years, a novice will also study the
fundamentals of the more important disciplines such as scrying,
remembrancing, mechanics and eschatology. These disciplines are
studied intensely, and never are more than two of them pursued
at a single time. Within these bounds, the novice is free to
structure his own education. In fact, he – or she – is expected
to follow the tree of knowledge down its many branchings,
choosing the most fascinating arts and disciplines for special
study. How well the novice chooses is a measure of his
intellectual worth – and of his shih. Although each novice will
have many tutors who offer advice and wisdom, ultimately, the
novice alone is responsible for his education. At the end of
his novitiate, when each novice is tested for admission to one
of the colleges, he himself must bear the shame if he fails to
become a journeyman and is dismissed from the Order.
 Danlo's first tutor, as it happened, was the esteemed Master
Jonath Haas, an old, old man with a warty face
257
and a great mind and a passion for bestowing intellectual
gifts upon his favourite students. Master Jonath was a
classical holist of the school that had absorbed the old
science, and like many of his fellow academicians, he had a
love of theory and abstraction. It was his joy to compose
models of the universe, to represent the incredibly complex
processes of the cosmos with symbols of the universal syntax.
There was great power, Master Jonath claimed, in such formal
systems: the power of generalization and the discovery of
universal patterns and metaphors. One day, on the 51st of
false winter, over mugs of cinnamon coffee that he served
Danlo in his little apartment near the Academy, he delivered
one of his many lectures:
  'And so you may think of holism as the formal study of
interconnectedness – does that interest you, Young Danlo? I
thought it might. Connections: what is language but an
expression of connections? Relations? Metaphors? I am sitting
on this chair. The sun pours down like gold on that peculiar
feather you wear in your hair. It is impossible to map two
co-ordinate spaces of different dimensions onto one another in
a one-to-one and bicontinuous fashion. Map! Spaces! Dimensions!
Fashion! What are the definitions of mathematics but metaphors?
Torison spaces, embedding, paths and points – metaphors, all.
Nature moves by metaphor. This is what mathematics is: a system
of crystallized, highly refined metaphors. And more so with the
universal syntax. What is the universal syntax if not a
generalization of mathematics into a truly universal language?
With mathematics, we may represent the distortions of the
manifold or model the chaos of a cloud; with the universal
syntax, we may relate the Dragon opening of chess to the use of
colour in the Scutari body change to the pattern of supernovae
in the Vild. All possible relationships. All connections. The
better models we make, the more connections are revealed. How
else but through holism to really see the overarching patterns
of the universe?'
Danlo soon found that there was a great beauty in this
258
 ruling intellectual system of Civilized Worlds. Although he
never forgot Old Father's warning that holism was the most
seductive of all worldviews and systems precisely because it
was the most universal, he devoured Master Jonath's lessons
with a voraciousness toward knowing that pleased the old man.
Every morning Danlo reported to Master Jonath's apartment at
the appointed time, and together they studied the masterworks
of the greatest holists such as Moriah Ede and Li Tao Cirlot.
And every morning Master Jonath would assign Danlo the various
exercises, problems, and compositions that are the bones of the
holists' art. Master Jonath, ever bemused and suspicious of the
snowy owl's feather that Danlo sported, inevitably discovered
Danlo's attachment to the Alaloi totem system. Master Jonath
seemed to know almost everything about this system, as he did
about most everything else. As an exercise – a demonstration of
holism's infinite subtlety – he suggested to Danlo that they
begin a formal representation of the Alaloi system. It was his
pride to demonstrate how holism could encompass any and all
systems, even one so bizarre as that of primitive humans who
anoint their newborn babies with menstrual blood out of the
observation that this life-giving substance is permeated with
the World-spirit in much the same way that a magnetic field
surrounds a lodestone. And so, over the endless mugs of coffee
greasy with sweet cream, they worked together encoding the two
classes of animals, or the three aspects of the self, or the
four elements of the world – blood, fire, ice, and wind – into
the symbols of the universal syntax. (In the latter example,
Master Jonath suggested selecting a quaternion often used to
encode the four suits of the Japanese Tarot and the four
circuits of the human brain – as well as the four Scutari sexes
and the four movements of Beethoven's Last Symphony.) Danlo
loved this difficult work, and he often wished that he could
stop time for a year so that he might master the intricacies of
holism, uninterrupted by other concerns.
259
  But time – in the towers and apartments of the Academy, in
the cold imperatives of civilization – moves in one direction
only and is difficult to stop. Inevitably, the 65th of false
winter arrived, the Day of Submission, and Danlo was forced to
put aside his play with abstraction and symbol. After breakfast
that day, all the new novices across Borja waited in their
sleeping chambers as they exchanged bits of nervous
conversation and doubts. Danlo was the first boy in Perilous
Hall to be called down to the first floor where the high
novices were waiting, lined up in front of their beds. They
each bowed when Danlo came into their chamber. Pedar stepped
forward, handed him a broom and said, 'Well, it's the Boy of
Ice – welcome to Perilous Hall!'
  Pedar Sadi Sanat stood red-eyed and irritable, picking his
face. Although Danlo didn't know it, Pedar was addicted to
jook, a squalid drug whose effects include inflamed eyes and
irritability – as well as bleeding gums, pimples, and even
hallucinations. As people do, Pedar used it only to enhance his
intelligence. It is known that the human brain, at puberty,
releases a hormone that dissolves any unused synapses laid down
during one's childhood. This enables adult human beings, with
their adult, hardwired brains, to concentrate and apply the
lessons they have learned earlier in life – but at the cost of
flexibility and new insights. Jook, when snorted through the
nostrils or dissolved in one's drink, inhibits the release of
this hormone while stimulating new synaptic growth. It is said
that jook can make a bright boy brighter; in delaying the onset
of terminal adulthood, it can sometimes transform a dullard
into a genius. There are always many who pursue this miracle,
even though they sacrifice their sociability, their health,
even their very sanity.
  'Will you make my bed, Danlo the Wild, the Nameless Child?'
Pedar scratched at his eyes and directed Danlo toward his
rumpled, bloodstained sheets. 'You may change my sheets every
third day.'
That morning Danlo did indeed make his bed, and in
260

 the mornings that followed he fetched Pedar's robes to and
from the laundry, swept the floor around his bed, and sharpened
his skates with a long, sparkling diamond file. The most
onerous of his duties was the nightly shaving of Pedar's head.
Each evening after supper he ran down the spiral stairway and
reported to the first floor bathing room; each evening he
gagged on steam as he grasped the diamond-edged straight razor
and drew it in short, deft strokes across Pedar's skull. A few
times, Danlo considered how easy it would be to let the
gleaming razor slip down Pedar's neck, to guide it across the
great artery which pulsed in his throat. Such thoughts,
however, were even more repulsive to Danlo than the reality of
his servitude. Never killing or hurting another, even in one's
thoughts – this was the spirit of ahimsa. Danlo tried
ferociously to gentle his thoughts. In truth, he was not a
violent man (or boy), and so each evening, in the Fravashi way,
he tried to remake his consciousness into a mirror that would
reflect the best parts of Pedar's spirit. He shaved Pedar's
head until it was a gleaming white, with neither scrapes nor
nicks to betray a lack of mindfulness and good will. Danlo was
adept with cutting tools; in fact, his instant skill with the
razor angered Pedar. The high novices like to haze the newer
boys, but to do so, they need to find an excuse. It was a
tradition in Perilous Hall for a high novice to wait until his
head was cut shaving (and given the inexperience most boys had
with the barbaric, anachronistic straight razors, cuts were
inevitable) before beginning this hazing. Danlo's natural
nobility and his adamantine resolve not to hate seemed only to
frustrate Pedar. Obviously, Pedar did not want to behold the
better parts of himself, for he would not look at Danlo eye to
eye or return his bow when the shaving was completed. In truth,
Pedar revelled in his meanness. Some people are like that.
Because he was cruel, vindictive and blind to his own
fundamental nobility, however stifled and sullied, one evening
he ordered Danlo to do the unthinkable.
261
 'You will shave my beard now,' Pedar said. 'Here, with this
razor, and careful you don't cut me.'
'You want me to shave your ... face, O Excellent One?'
 Pedar was sitting slumped on a stool in the first floor
bathing chamber. His hairless torso was flabby because he hated
exercise; the skin across his chest was sallow from snorting
too much jook, and he had large, loose nipples that looked like
slices of raw liver. He pointed at the enamelled shaving basin.
Water hissed from old pipes in a continuous jet, which struck
the half-filled basin and sent up a hot, soapy spray. In the
steam, a cadre of Pedar's friends stood around in a circle,
intimidating Danlo with their hard, naked bodies should he
attempt to flee. Danlo himself was clothed in an informal robe.
He was miserably hot and sweating inside his baggy woollens,
and he repeated, 'You want me to shave your face, O Excellent
One?'
  'I've tired of that title. You will begin calling me, "O
Vastened One".'
  'But O Vastened One,' Danlo protested, 'how can I shave your
face without touching it?'
  'Because, Wild Boy, I will give you permission to touch my
face.'
 As he said this, his friends, who had been jeering at Danlo,
fell silent and looked at one another in surprise.
  Danlo did not want to shave Pedar's face. He had finally
learned that on many of the Civilized Worlds, it was the worst
of insults to touch another's face. And, although he was coming
to respect civilized customs, this was not his only reason for
not wanting to touch him. 'I might cut you,' he said.
 Indeed, it would have been impossible to shave Pedar's
scraggly beard without cutting him. His face was an angry red
landscape of pimples, scabs and irritated flesh. From temple to
neck, volcanoes of infection rose up among the pockmarks and
patchy scars. No area of his face (or on his chest and back)
was free of abscess; it was impossible to find a smooth plane
of skin to draw a razor across. And
262
so, as Pedar stretched up his chin and glanced knowingly at his
friends, Danlo tried to cut around the pimples. He used the
razor's bevelled tip to sever the downy hair follicles almost
one by one. He worked as painstakingly as any Alaloi man
carving a piece of ivory, but at last his fingers grew tired
and shaking, and he let the razor slip. He cut open a huge red
pimple on Pedar's throat. Blood and pus thick as yellow cream
erupted and dribbled down Pedar's neck. Pedar gave a jerk, and
Danlo cut him again, this time a long, nasty gash through skin
and scar running along his windpipe. There was blood
everywhere, blood running down Pedar's chest to spatter on the
white stool, blood sticky between Danlo's knuckles and
congealing along the razor's smooth diamond blade.
'You've cut me!' Pedar shouted.
  Danlo swished the razor in the basin's soapy water, and
almost instantly flowers of red were sucked down the drain. Not
knowing what else to do, he pressed the sleeve of his robe to
Pedar's throat. 'It is not a deep cut, but it is bad to let the
blood run, and I– '
'You've cut me, goddammit!'
'I am sorry.'
'Stupid Wild Boy.'
'I am truly sorry.'
 Pedar jumped to his feet with his hand clamped to his neck.
He glared at Danlo and shouted, 'You're truly sorry what?'
'I am truly sorry ... O Vastened One.'
 'The Wild Boy has forgotten his etiquette,' Pedar said. He
nodded to his six friends. They were each almost full men, and
one of them, Arpiar Pogossian, with his blocky, cultivated
muscles, was almost as large as Bardo the Just, who was the
largest man Danlo had ever known. 'Let's teach him the proper
etiquette,' Pedar said.
  All at once, Pedar's friends fell on Danlo. They grabbed his
arms and legs, throwing him to the floor. Danlo's ear smacked
against the tile, and the pain of bruised cartilage
263
 made him angry. He struggled and thrashed like a shagshay
bull being brought to the ice by wolves. He flailed out and
kicked someone; someone shouted, 'Why did you let go his leg?'
  'He's damn strong!' Arpiar huffed out. Too damn strong!'
  Someone was groaning; as it happened, Danlo had kicked one
of the boys' hands, breaking two fingers. Danlo could almost
feel the sharp, grating pain of it in his own fingers. He was
so ashamed of breaking ahimsa that his body fell slack and the
other boys managed to pin him to the floor. Arpiar Pogossian
was now kneeling on Danlo's thigh while the other boys each
grasped one of his limbs.
 'What's wrong with him?' Arpiar wanted to know. 'Why is he
just lying there?'
  Pedar crouched above Danlo and said, 'He was a student of a
Fravashi Old Father. They say he's taken a vow of ahimsa.'
  A sad-faced, ironic boy – his name was Rafael Wu – stood off
by himself and held up his mangled hand. 'Ahimsa!' he shrieked
out. 'I think my fingers are broken!'
  Danlo lay with his spine and joints pressed to the tile. On
top of him, crushing his chest and belly, were four naked,
sweating boys. It was hard for him to breathe, but he smelled
the soap and sweat running off Pedar's glistening skin. Pedar
knelt over him, looking at him upside down. From this
perspective, his eyes seemed as darkly patterned as kawa
shells, hard and scarcely human. Because Danlo was Pedar's
personal servant – because it was against all tradition and
rules – Pedar was not permitted to touch Danlo. But he had
invented other ways to torment him. He had his fingers up
against the gash in his neck. The bleeding had mostly stopped,
but he squeezed up some blood which ran over the point of his
chin and dripped down into Danlo's face.
'No!' Danlo suddenly shouted. 'No!'
Pedar's fingers were working furiously across his
264
 inflamed, lacerated neck. By chance (or design) he squeezed a
few pimples, which burst open, spraying pus and blood into
Danlo's eyes. Danlo shut his eyes tightly. He shut his mouth so
that none of Pedar's blood would get in. All of his life, long
before he had vowed not to harm any living thing, he had known
it was very bad to taste the blood of others, the worst kind of
shaida. He wanted to cry out, 'No, no, this blood will defile
both our spirits!', but his mouth was tightly closed, and he
could not speak.
  Finally Pedar stood up and the other boys let Danlo go.
Pedar seemed suddenly ashamed and confused. Tomorrow evening,'
he muttered, 'you'd better be more careful how you shave me.'
 Danlo fled up the spiral stairway then. He fled into the
vast, cool familiarity of his dormitory chamber. Hanuman, who
was practising his killing art out on the floor, saw him
covered in blood and froze with his fist pointed in the air.
'Danlo, what happened?'
  As Danlo hurried into the bathing chamber, he shook his head
in despair. After stripping off his befouled robe and washing
the diseased blood from his face, he returned to the main
chamber. There he huddled beneath his bed's blankets and
shivered with hatred. He hated Pedar Sadi Sanat. He hated him
with a black, bitter passion. And more, he hated a system – a
civilization, world, or universe – that could produce such a
boy. This hatred poisoned his spirit. And the worst part of his
hatred was his contempt for himself, or rather, his contempt
for being weak enough to hate at all. Silently, at the vital
moment, he had turned his sight away from ahimsa. He was far
from the harmony of life that he sought, as far away as death
was from life.
 'Danlo, Danlo,' he heard a voice say, 'what happened to you?'
It was Hanuman standing above him, shaking his shoulder as he
called his name.
'I ... broke my vow of ahimsa,' Danlo said at last. He
265
 sat up and threw back the covers. Many of his fellow novices
milled about the room, sharpening their skates for the next
day. The sound of ridged files being drawn against steel whined
through the air. As the boys prepared for bed, they stole
glances at him, but he ignored them. 'O blessed God ... why did
I break my vow?'
  He told Hanuman everything then. Hanuman stood there
listening, biting at the callouses covering his knuckles. When
he heard what Pedar had done to Danlo in the first floor
bathing room, his face fell fearful and secretive. He spoke no
word of reassurance, but in his eyes was a shared outrage. In
truth, Danlo was immediately afraid of what his friend's
silent rage might lead to.
'I must suffer Pedar and his little tortures,' Danlo said.
'I understand.'
  'If I continue to hate him or wish him harm, how will I ever
learn ahimsa?'
  Hanuman bit his knuckle and tore loose a piece of yellow
callous, which he spat onto the floor. 'I understand,' he
repeated.
  'It must be hard for you, too,' Danlo said. To serve Master
Bardo.'
  'It is hard,' Hanuman said. A strange look came over him.
'But it's possible to learn from such cruelty, isn't it?
Someday, I'll have my revenge upon Bardo. As you will with
Pedar.'
 Danlo reached beneath the blankets and brought out his bamboo
flute. He held it lightly between his fingers and looked at
Hanuman. There is a saying I learned when I was young: Silu
harya, manse ri damya. It means, "Children rage, men restrain
themselves".'
  'Just so, Danlo. The ability to control oneself is
everything.'
 'Yes,' Danlo agreed. 'But, Hanu, do we mean the same thing by
this word "control"?'
  As false winter ended and the first snows of winter fell
cold and deep, Danlo had many opportunities to practise
266
control; after some hundred days of Pedar's hazing had passed,
Danlo had learned to restrain the worst of his hatred, and he
began to understand the terrible patience and strength that
ahimsa required of a man. Pedar never again defiled Danlo with
his blood or other bodily substances, but found more subtle
ways to torment him. In front of his friends, he ridiculed
Danlo for wearing a bird's feather in his hair; he made Danlo
polish his skates over and over until Danlo fell faint and sick
from the smell of boot polish; he did everything possible to
ruin Danlo's sleep. This was the cruellest part of his hazing,
cruel in intent if not result. Every night after lights out,
Pedar climbed the spiral stairs to Danlo's chamber. Since
hazing was not officially permitted after the novices had gone
to bed, he climbed quietly. And he climbed carefully, very
carefully. Pedar had once slipped on the stairs as a first year
novice; he always placed his feet exactly in the centre of the
hard stone steps. Every night he would steal through the silent
chamber where the youngest boys slept. He would rouse Danlo
from his bed and lead him down the stairs to the first floor
meditation room. There he would make Danlo sing the traditional
canticles of the Order or perform the strenuous postures of
body yoga or – and this was his favourite torture – he would
read aloud the beginning stanzas of some famous ancient poem
and then make Danlo supply the concluding lines; if Danlo
failed this test, he would have to perform a Sufi dance for the
other boys or hop up and down on one foot until he fell
writhing to the floor with leg cramps. As many nights passed,
Danlo applied his phenomenal memory toward learning by heart
hundreds of ancient poems, and then hundreds of hundreds. It
soon became almost impossible for Pedar to surprise him with an
unfamiliar poem, even such as the poems of Indra Sen and other
obscure poets of the Third Dark Age. Danlo's feats of memory
naturally infuriated Pedar. And so he devised a new game, which
was to make Danlo recite as many poems as he could for
267
 as long as he could. Pedar loved poetry, and he loved it the
more Danlo's voice grew hoarse from forcing out line after
line of poems composed many thousands of years ago on Old
Earth or some other abandoned world. Pedar, of course,
sacrificed little of his own sleep listening to ancient
poetry. When he grew tired and drowsy, he left the meditation
room for his bed, only to be replaced by Arpiar Pogossian or
one of the other high novices. In this way, working in shifts,
Pedar's friends often made Danlo stay awake the whole night.
  One morning after a particularly excruciating session of
poetry recitations, Hanuman caught Danlo stumbling into bed
and told him, 'Oh, no, Danlo, look at you! There's nothing in
tradition to allow Pedar to keep you awake like this. Why
don't you go to Master Bardo and make a complaint? Or allow me
to?'
 Danlo glanced at Hanuman and yawned. He looked battered and
gaunt, almost as if he'd had his nose broken. Dark half-moons
bruised the skin beneath his eyes. The eyes themselves,
however, were lively and seemed to hold a brightness at odds
with his sleeplessness. 'Silu wanya, manse ri damya,' he said.
'Children complain, men restrain themselves.'
 'Do your Alaloi people have a saying for everything?'
 'Yes,' Danlo said, 'they are natural philosophers.'
  'But you mustn't let Pedar ruin your sleep.'
  'But if I complain to Master Bardo, he might punish Pedar.'
  Hanuman grinned wickedly and said, 'I hope Master Bardo
takes him out into Lavi Square and slaps his face. There should
be a public rebuke.'
  Danlo closed his eyes and shook his head. 'O, Hanu, this is
what must not happen! Nothing I say, nothing I do, not even in
my thinking must I cause him harm.'
 'But you mustn't take this notion of ahimsa too far,' Hanuman
said. 'Pedar is a pustule – why should you care if Master Bardo
punishes him?'
268
 'Pedar is a pustule,' Danlo agreed, 'but he is also something
else.'
'And what would that be?'
'Something splendid, something rare.'
'But you hate him!'
 'But I ... must not hate him.'
 'Then I will hate him for you,' Hanuman said. He touched
Danlo's forehead to see if he had a fever, then continued,
'Perhaps it's a noble exercise to restrain yourself from hating
others. Perhaps. But you should keep your will to hate as sharp
as a razor. Perhaps someday you'll give up ahimsa as an
unworkable ethic – and then you'll need all your hate to
protect yourself from Pedar or others like him.'
 During this time of hazing, which grew worse through winter
into deep winter and was much more severe for Danlo than the
other boys, three things saved him from physical and mental
ruin. First, as luck would have it (and Danlo was always a
lucky man), it was the season of holidays. Triolet, The Day of
Remembrance, The Tycho's Day, Mourning Night, The Festival of
the Broken Dolls – three days out of ten were given over to
rest and celebration. Danlo was not required to serve Pedar on
these days, nor did he have any other duties. He was free to
curl up beneath his warm blankets and sleep as long as he
liked. Second, Danlo had an unusual attitude toward sleep. He
could do without sleep when he had to. Often, as a boy hunting
seals with Haidar out on the sea ice, he had stood awake above
a seal's hole, stomping his feet to keep them from freezing,
waiting and waiting. Often he had waited more than a day for
Nunki to rise up out of the sea and impale himself on his
harpoon. Just as often, though, in deep winter when the west
wind blew swift and deadly, he had huddled in his cave and
slept continually for a day and a night. In truth, he had a
rare ability for sleeping. And, as a result of his experience
with the autists, he was adept at descending into the cold,
deep, healing waters of
269
his dreams. More than once he dreamed of his other-self, the
mysterious snowy owl. Ahira, with his orange eyes and
shimmering white feathers, appeared to Danlo and told him that
sleep was a rejoining with God and that he must seek this holy
state whenever he could. And so, through the three nights and
days of Triolet while the people of the City smoked toalache
in celebration of the end of the War of Assassins, he slept in
his bed, getting up only to relieve himself or to eat a little
food. And when he finally awakened, clear-headed and fresh, he
found Hanuman suffering the aftereffects of his first taste of
toalache, and he said, 'Sleep is bliss, yes? As long as I can
return to sleep, how can Pedar harm me?'
  The third thing which saved Danlo from ruin was Hanuman's
growing love for him. Due to Hanuman's secretive nature, this
love was not manifested openly, with words or the crude
gestures of hand-slapping favoured by the other boys. But in a
hundred ways Hanuman acknowledged the deep correspondence
between them. With a quick exchange of glances or a slight,
almost imperceptible head bow, he would indicate his love of
Danlo's playfulness, his passion for life, his essential
wildness. He admired the wild, dangerous side of Danlo's
spirit, even though that wildness had nearly led to his
drowning the day they had wrestled together in the hot pool.
Many years later, when their friendship had grown beyond love
into a profound and terrible understanding of each other, he
would record in his universal computer: 'I used to like
watching Danlo skate – do I remember too clearly how he
practically tore up the ice of Borja's glidderies? These
bittersweet images so impossible to forget: the sunlight
reflecting off his skate blades, his muscles bunching and
flowing beneath his kamelaika. And his deep, quick eyes, the
way he processed information: nuances of temperature, minutiae,
a subtle change in the colour, planarity or texture of the ice
that others couldn't see. He had such a reckless speed stroke,
light and quick – I should say, "lightning quick" – but there
270
was always the power in his legs, the fluid, unpredictable
power. Madhava li Shing used to say he was showing off, but no,
he just loved skating too fast. It's strange, isn't it, how
much of a man is revealed in the way he moves? Soul and
selfness are the most elusive conceits, but from the first, I
could see in Danlo's soul what always attracted (and repelled)
me: his strength and verve. He was wilder than I, and beautiful
in his wildness, like the strange white owl bird that he always
emulated. And that always terrified me. Nothing is so
terrifying as a man who possesses the innocence, the wildness
and grace of an animal.' Above all, Hanuman admired Danlo's
courage and will to endure in the face of Pedar's petty
tortures. A man's will, he believed, the will to power over
himself, was a singular, godlike quality. But will flows from
life, and Hanuman well remembered how fragile life could be.
And so, out of love and friendship, he secretly vowed to do
what he must to preserve Danlo's life and keep him from harm.
 One day, on the forty-ninth of deep winter, Pedar summoned
Danlo to the meditation room and said, 'I don't like your
friend.'
  Danlo was kneeling on one of the room's wool mats, in the
hated position of politeness. He stared at the lovely black and
red walls, appreciating the whorls and finegrained texture of
the jewood panels. The meditation room was full of silences and
good smells, and he would have loved sitting in this ancient
chamber but for the cruelties inflicted on him there. 'Which
friend, O Exalted One?'
 'Hanuman li Tosh,' Pedar spat out. 'I don't like the way he
looks at me.'
'O Exalted One, how does he look at you?'
'I'm tired of that. Call me, "The Omniscient One".'
'Yes, O Omniscient One.'
  'Your friend,' Pedar said, 'looks at me as one looks at a
piece of ancient sculpture. Or worse, he looks at me as if I
were a Scutari or some other loathsome alien. And worse
271
yet, whenever I greet him on the stairs, he refuses to look at
me at all.'
 'Perhaps, O Omniscient One, he cannot bear the sight of your
pimply face.'
  As Danlo said this, Pedar blushed in rage, which caused the
pimples across his cheeks and forehead to flare up red as
blood. Danlo couldn't help smiling the rebellious, mocking
smile that he had learned in Old Father's house. Ahimsa, as he
understood it, required only that he never harm another's body
or spirit. To inflict mind pain on another in order to provoke
understanding was a Fravashi tradition that he cherished.
  In truth, he liked fighting Pedar with words. Deep in his
belly he continued to hate Pedar. And deeper still, roaring
like an ocean in the dark unknown part of himself – in truth,
bred into his chromosomes – was an urge to destroy that which
he hated.
  'What did I hear you say?' Pedar screamed out. He balled his
fist and made a move to strike Danlo's head. But he must have
remembered that the penalty for such an act might be
banishment from the Order, because he pulled his punch up
short and smacked his fist into the palm of his hand.
'Your face,' Danlo said, 'as splendid as it is– '
 'Never mind! Never mind, Wild Boy. Won't you ever learn your
etiquette? Goddamn you! Tonight you'll think about etiquette
while you're scraping slime off the tiles in the bathing room.'
'O thank you!' Danlo said.
'Thank you what?'
 'For yet another opportunity to practise restraint, thank
you, O Pimpled One.'
  That night Danlo scraped the tiles of the first floor
bathing room, or rather, he scraped the black lines of bacteria
growing between the tiles. Pedar provided neither
scrubbing-brush nor liquid solvents to digest the bacteria.
Danlo had to use his long fingernails to scrape, dig, and ream.
By the
272
time morning came, he had cleaned between only two hundred of
the room's 12,608 tiles. Most of his fingernails were
splintered, broken down to the quick and stained black with a
sticky, evil-smelling filth.
 'You'll report here every night until you have finished,'
Pedar said as he examined Danlo's work. The morning sunlight,
in faint filaments of silver, was diffusing through the frosted
window panes high along the room's eastern wall. 'Do you
understand?'
  And Danlo yawned, smiled, and then replied, 'Yes, O Pimpled
One, I do understand.'
 Later that morning, an exasperated Hanuman cried out, 'He's
given you an impossible task!'
  Hanuman's outrage mirrored the feelings of the other first
year novices. Madhava li Shing was aghast when he heard of
Danlo's 'sentence', as he called it. He was a small boy,
smaller even than Hanuman, but he had the arrogant, black,
almond-shaped eyes and the sardonic superiority of Shing
World's academician ruling class. This is very much an
injustice,' he said in his calm, unperturbable manner.
'Something must be done.' Other boys – Adan Dur li Kadir,
Javier Miro and Sherborn of Darkmoon – agreed with him. Through
the snowy days of winter, they had witnessed Danlo's fierce
stubbornness, and most had come to respect him. Their initial
suspicion had given way to admiration, sympathy and, in quite a
few of them, devotion. Danlo was a natural leader; there was
something about him which compelled people to want to share his
passions and his vision. Madhava would have gone to the Master
of Novices in protest at Pedar's barbaric hazing, but Danlo
enjoined him and his new friends to silence and secrecy.
 Somehow, though, word of Danlo's struggle spread throughout
Borja. Probably a high novice, one of Pedar's acquaintances or
enemies on the first floor, talked too freely. Every boy and
girl in the college, not only in Perilous Hall but those of
Stone Row, The Hermitage and other dormitories, learned that
Pedar Sadi Sanat was testing
273
 Danlo's will to ahimsa. Some novices, of course, those from
the more obscure Civilized Worlds, knew little of the Fravashi
or their concept of ahimsa. (In fact, ahimsa is an ancient
Sanskrit word and was a hallowed belief of Old Earth's Jain
religion. The Jains wore gauze masks over their noses and
mouths to keep from accidentally inhaling and killing the
various flying insects which swarmed over the hotter regions of
the Asian continent. Fravashi mores do not demand such strict
reverence of life. For the Fravashi, the great wrong is the
intentional harming of life's possibilities, without sufficient
cause.) Most people, however, appreciated the ideal of ahimsa,
even if they thought it was unworkable as a rule to guide one's
life. Hanuman was the first to observe ahimsa's irony. 'Pedar,'
he said to Danlo one day, 'has a pustule in place of a heart.
You vow to harm no one, and he uses your compassion against
you, to do you harm.'
 Inevitably, the story of Danlo's sufferings reached the
Master of Novices. Bardo the Just immediately summoned Pedar to
the Novices' Sanctuary. There, somewhere inside that fortress
of stone and tradition, he chastised him. No records have been
kept of Pedar's 'interview' with Master Bardo, but soon a
rumour circulated around the college that Pedar's punishment
had been severe, private and quite painful. Pedar was ordered
to stop hazing Danlo. 'By God!' someone heard Master Bardo
bellowing through closed doors. 'Isn't life cruel enough
without adding barbarism to the barbaric happenstance of birth?
Ah, why didn't I see to it that Danlo served a worthy novice? I
must have been drunk when I let the Head Novice make the
assignations, too bad.'
 Pedar should have left Danlo alone after that, but he did
not. Irrationally, he blamed Danlo for his humiliation in
Master Bardo's chambers. He was indeed a cruel and vengeful
boy, and worse, he was proud beyond all reason. Although his
origins were the lowest of the low (both his parents were
harijan who had come to Neverness in the
274

mistaken belief that drugs such as jook or jambool and access
to the cetic's infamous brain machines were free to all) he
fancied that farther back along his genetic lines, the imprint
of a ronin warrior-poet, neurologician, or an exemplar graced
his chromosomes. How else to explain his surprising
intelligence and the fact that he, a harijan boy, had won for
himself a place at Borja? Would an exemplar allow a lesser
breed of human being to insult him? Would a warrior-poet, those
most fearless of assassins, fear the outbursts of the bloated,
bombastic Master of Novices? Out of respect for his pretend
ancestors – one day he actually admitted this to Arpiar
Pogossian – he planned to humiliate Danlo. He would respect the
letter of Master Bardo's injunction against further hazing. But
he would repay shame with shame and remind Danlo of his place
and the proper respect due his superiors.
  And so Pedar began collecting stories about Danlo. At night,
after lights out, he crept up the shadowed stairs and crouched
near the top, listening to whispers and murmurs of the younger
boys talking bed to bed. In truth, he employed various means of
spying on Danlo. He knew a journeyman horologe at Lara Sig who
knew a courtesan whose friend was one of Old Father's students.
There were many wild rumours about Danlo, and he tried to trace
each one to its source. From the first day in Lavi Square, he
had thought there was something mysterious about Danlo and his
past, something dark, powerful and profound. Because Pedar was
a clever boy and expert at research (it was his ambition to
become Lord Historian of the Order), he soon pieced together an
explanation of this mystery.
  On the 64th of deep winter, he confronted Danlo in Lavi
Square. It was one of those blue-cold, perfectly clear days in
which the things of the world – the ice sculptures, the orange
and red lichens etching the buildings, the individual needles
of the yu trees – stand out almost too vividly. It was really
too cold to be outside for very long, but the
275
 women and men (and children) of the City like to bask in the
noonday sun no matter the season, and so, near the centre of
the Square a warming pavilion had been set up. Beneath a
half-dome of clary supported by wood pillars, scores of novices
gathered to discuss the events of the day. Their white furs
were open to the warm air gusting up from grates in the ice.
They stood about kicking their skate blades against the grates
as they looked for familiar faces in the stream of novices and
masters passing through the Square. Every day after lunch,
Danlo and a few of his friends from Perilous Hall would meet
together beneath the pavilion with the other novices of Borja.
64th day was a day much like any other – Danlo stood near the
cooler air at the edge of the pavilion taking in the ring of
steel against steel, skates click-clacking, and the fresh, hard
smell of chiselled ice. Hanuman, Madhava li Shing, Sherborn of
Darkmoon and three girls who lived in The Hermitage surrounded
him. He had just begun debating the paradoxes of causality with
one of these girls, Rihana Brandreth Tal, when Hanuman pointed
towards the corner of the Square and said, 'Oh, no. Look,
Danlo, it's the Pimple and his friends.'
  Two glidderies scissored the white ice, marking the Square
from corner to corner with a giant red 'X'. Danlo looked along
the line of Hanuman's rigid finger down one of the glidderies.
He saw Pedar Sadi Sanat, Arpiar Pogossian and Rafael Wu
skating purposefully toward them. Pedar, in the lead, skated
right up to the warming pavilion. Without pause or greeting,
from the inner pocket of his furs he removed a stiff
rectangular object – it was, in fact, a foto – and held it up
in front of Danlo's face. 'Is this man your father?' Pedar
asked. He pitched his voice so that it carried through the
pavilion out into the Square. The man standing at the centre
of this foto – is he your father?'
'Look!' someone said. 'It's a foto of Mallory Ringess.' Danlo
drew in a breath of cold air as he wondered how
276
Pedar had guessed his true lineage. He looked at the foto, at
the swirl of colours which formed up beneath its clear outer
skin. In the better fotos, of course, the millions of coloured
pixels sense which part of the foto a person is looking at and
highlight and magnify this part. But because Danlo couldn't
focus on any particular feature – he had never seen a foto
before – the foto remained undefined. He could make out the
greens and whites of what might have been a mountain; he beheld
dark shapes, flesh-coloured pigments and a blue beyond blue.
The foto held little jewelled specks of a deeper blueness than
anything he had ever seen outside of his night-time dreams. In
truth, no object of the natural world, neither the eggshell of
Ayeye, the thallow, nor even the midnight sky, was so deeply
and perfectly blue.
'It's lovely!' he exclaimed. 'What is it?'
  Arpiar Pogossian came up behind Pedar and knocked his skates
against one of the pillars to remove the ice shavings. To
Danlo, he huffed out, 'Remember your etiquette!'
 Danlo favoured him with a quick head bow, turned to Pedar and
repeated, 'What is it, O Enlightened One?'
'It's a foto,' Pedar said.
 Danlo continued staring at the beautiful colours spread
beneath the surface of the shiny rectangle before him. 'And
what is a foto, O Enlightened One?'
  'It's a foto of Mallory Ringess' expedition to the Alaloi.
Haven't you ever seen a foto?'
 In Drisana's little shop, when Danlo had imprinted the
Language of the Civilized Worlds, he had learned the word
'foto'. A foto, he remembered, was a two-dimensional array of
images representing point for point – capturing in shape and
colour – the objects of the real world. In some ways, a foto
was like a cave painting. Only a foto was more exact, more
faithful to the surfaces and edges of reality, where the
paintings of his ancestors revealed the truth and essence of
Ayeye, Sabra, or Berura, the hooded seal and the other animals
of the world.
277
 'Well?' Pedar said. He strained to hold the foto straight out
without letting his arm tremble.
 As Danlo studied the foto, he was aware of the novices
chattering and pressing closer. He heard someone say, 'Danlo
the Wild doesn't know what a foto is!'
'Here, take it,' Pedar said at last.
  Danlo held the foto in his naked, gloveless hands. It had
the heft and feel of a piece of bonewood. The four corners of
the foto were sharp against his skin, and its surface was as
glossy as ilka-kweitling, the young white ice.
 'That is the Ringess!' Sherborn said as he nudged Danlo and
jabbed his finger at the foto. 'Mallory Ringess! And Bardo the
Just, before he became Master of Novices. He looks so young!'
  Pedar edged up very close to Danlo. He was so close that
Danlo could see each of the large pores puncturing his cheeks
and smell the metallic acridness of jook wafting off his
breath. Pedar had been addicted to jook his whole life, ever
since he was a fetus floating in his mother's jook-tainted
womb. If Danlo had known of Pedar's bondage to jook, he might
have pitied rather than hated him.
 'Well?' Pedar said as he looked Danlo eye to eye. 'Are you
the bastard son of Mallory Ringess?'
 Again Danlo returned to looking at the foto. He tried to make
sense of its pretty colours; he tried to see faces in the chaos
of shape, shimmer and shadow. He could see no faces. He
wondered that Sherborn and others seemed to perceive the
likeness of Bardo the Just near the edge of the foto. Danlo had
keen eyes – he could pick out the ominous silhouette of a great
white bear across nearly five miles of sea ice – and so he
wondered why he could not begin to see what others could
perceive so easily. Then he remembered a saying of Old
Father's: Seeing is an act of will accomplished by the brain.
What was wrong with his will to vision, he wondered, that he
could not see what was before him?
278
  'Danlo!' This came from Hanuman who was standing by his
side, looking back and forth between Pedar and the foto.
'Danlo, give the foto back to him – you don't have to look at
it.'
  At these words, Pedar shot Hanuman a hateful look, but he
said nothing.
  Danlo smiled and shook his head. He gazed at the foto,
utterly entranced by what he was struggling to apprehend. The
deep winter light – low streaks of silver off the polished ice
– was dazzling, but it wasn't the sunlight which interfered
with his vision. He dropped his head to the side and whispered,
'Hanu, Hanu, it is not enough to see a thing just as it is, if
I cannot make sense of what I see.'
  'You shouldn't blame yourself,' Hanuman whispered. 'It's a
matter of the synapses linking up in the first year of life. As
a child you never learned to abstract reality from these kind
of images.'
 Beliefs are the eyelids of the mind, Danlo thought. And then
he said, 'But I am a man now. Should a child be able to see
what a man cannot?'
  Without taking his eyes from the foto, there on the ice of
Lavi Square with the voices of fifty curious children humming
in his ear, Danlo silently vowed that he would develop his
sense of vision no matter the difficulty, no matter the terror
(or shame) of what he might see.
  'Don't pretend to ignorance, Wild Boy,' Pedar said at last.
Although he was the taller of the two, his posture was lax,
and he slumped so that he stood face to face with Danlo.
'Don't tell me you can't see the resemblance between yourself
and the Ringess!'
  From the middle of the crowd, Rihana Brandreth Tal's voice
shrilled out, 'It's true, Danlo has the Ringess hair – look at
the strands of red in what's left of his beautiful hair.' She
was as small and quick as a sleekit, and one of her hands
darted out and grasped Danlo's queue where it dangled beneath
his cap. 'Black and red – who has ever had hair like that?'
279
 'And his eyes,' someone said, 'his face – it's sharp as a
falcon's!'
  Arpiar Pogossian nudged Pedar and said, The Wild Boy does
have a lean and predatory look, doesn't he?'
  'No, it's a fierce look,' Rihana said. 'He's fiercely
beautiful, like his father – if it's really true that Mallory
Ringess is his father. And that's why you've been hazing him,
everyone knows. You're afraid of him or envious. Or both.'
  'He is the bastard child of the Ringess,' Pedar said and he
looked at Danlo. 'Bastard child – do you want to hear the
evidence?'
  Hanuman held his palm out toward Pedar's chest. He said,
'Please don't stand so close.'
 'First year novices,' Arpiar said as he pointed a
white-gloved finger at Hanuman, 'don't tell high novices what
to do.'
 For a moment, Danlo closed his eyes and let his belly pump in
a stream of clear, cold air. Then he looked at Hanuman and
said, 'O Hanu, why can't I see it? Is there a man, the Mallory
Ringess, in this foto?'
 Hanuman cupped his hand over the back of Danlo's knuckles,
and he pulled both hand and foto nearer in order to get a
better look. 'Of course it's the Ringess,' he said. He traced
his forefinger along the foto, picking out facial features.
This is his nose, and here, his hair – it's as black as a
pilot's robe. Can you see it, falling over his forehead? And
his lips, and his eyes– '
  'I see him!' Danlo suddenly cried out. He had been looking
deeply into memory and mystery when the veil of chaos was
ripped away from the foto and the images embedded there
suddenly 'popped' into vision and made sense. There were three
women in the foto, and three men each dressed in black robes.
The man at the centre was tall and sinewy; with his long, high
nose and eyes of blue ice, he looked as fierce as a thallow.
'He is splendid! He does look like me, yes?'
Danlo glanced up from the foto and exchanged a
280
knowing look with Hanuman. Clearly the time had come for Danlo
to confess that he had been adopted as a child into the Devaki
tribe of the Alaloi. He could not imagine how Pedar had guessed
this, though he was eager to hear his 'evidence'. And he could
not imagine why he should be ashamed of such a father.
 'Danlo the Wild,' Pedar called out, addressing the novices
assembled in the warming pavilion, 'did not come to Neverness
from an elite school, as you have. Nor did he come from any of
the Civilized Worlds. I've been to the Hollow Fields and spoken
to the Master of Ships; there's no record of his immigration.
Therefore he must be a child of the City, as I am. But Danlo
did not attend the elite school on Neverness – I should know.
If he were a child of the City, why didn't he attend the elite
school? Why? Why was he permitted to petition for special
admittance to Borja if he'd been eligible to attend an elite
school? What's the answer to this mystery? Please listen, I
have a hypothesis.'
  And so Pedar strutted among the novices, and he delivered
his theory as to Danlo's mysterious origins. Because he was an
unsightly, unpopular boy the other novices practically fell
over each other trying to get out of his way. He glided here
and there, ground his toe pick into the ice, spun about and
stroked his short jerky strokes, all the while waving his hands
and gesticulating crudely. 'Danlo the Wild has been heard
speaking the Alaloi language,' he declared. 'I believe he was
raised among the Alaloi.' Pedar told them of the City's
expedition to the Alaloi sixteen years previously, the quest to
find the Elder Eddas embroidered within humanity's oldest DNA,
that of the primitive Alaloi tribes. The expedition, he told
them, had been a disaster. A scryer named Katharine had died in
the cave of the Devaki. A spear had killed Bardo the Just (the
City cryologists, of course, had later brought his frozen body
back to life), and there had been a murder of a Devaki man. The
expedition,' Pedar said, 'lasted almost
281
 a year. In that time, is it or isn't it possible that Mallory
Ringess fathered a child?'
 'But Danlo doesn't look at all like an Alaloi,' Rihana
protested. She held a white linen to her tiny, runny nose,
which was red and chafed due to constant rubbing. 'If Mallory
Ringess mated with a primitive woman – they're as hairy as
apes, aren't they? – wouldn't Danlo bear half her chromosomes?'
  Pedar picked at a pimple below his lip and said, 'It's my
hypothesis that Mallory Ringess had a child by Katharine the
Scryer.'
  As he said this, Rihana and many of the novices fell silent
and stared at Danlo. That his lineage had finally been
proclaimed pleased Danlo, though he couldn't guess why everyone
was staring at him so strangely.
  'If Mallory Ringess and Katharine created a child together,'
Rihana finally said, 'if Danlo is that child, why didn't they
bring him home to the City? Why didn't the Ringess and the
others bring him home?'
  'Well, Katharine died and the Ringess abandoned the child –
that's my hypothesis.'
  Danlo, who had listened in silence to this reconstruction of
his personal history, suddenly touched the feather in his hair
and whispered, 'Oh, Ahira, Ahira, is it true?' Even as he spoke
the words, he knew it must be true. Some part of him, deep in
his chest where his anima cried out in pain, recognized a
kinship with Katharine the Scryer and the man whom others
called Mallory Ringess. Again Danlo looked at the foto flat in
his hand, and it was like looking through a window of ice into
the dark, churning waters of memory. The foto's shifting
colours had captured the images of six people. Danlo had eyes
only for these people; the sights, sounds and smells of the
world diminished into insignificance, as of an unreal city seen
from very far away. While he studied the foto, remembering, a
few journeymen eschatologists and masters had come up to the
warming pavilion, but he ignored them. He ignored the chiming
282
noon bells, the hushed explanations falling from lip to lip, ,
and the white, icy glare hard in his eyes. The brain, he
remembered, is like a fine, woven cloth, a tapestry of silken
synapses which filter out noise in order to concentrate on
vital information. He looked at the foto. There he recognized
the huge, bearded bulk of Bardo the Just. He was surprised and
amused to learn that Bardo had known his father. He learned the
names of two of the women, Justine Ringess and Dama Moira
Ringess. They were radiant, intelligent-looking women, aunt and
mother, respectively, of the Ringess. The third woman was
Katharine the Scryer, she who must be his mother, his blood
mother. It hurt Danlo to look at her wise, beautiful, mutilated
face. (Or rather, at the image of her face.) She had no eyes
because she had blinded herself as a young woman. She had done
this, at her initiation as a scryer, in order to see visions of
the future. Everything about her face was a study of contrast
and paradox: the shimmering black hair falling over her white
cheeks and neck, the eye hollows black and mysterious beneath
the white plane of her forehead, the passion and calmness
stamped deeply into her lips. Danlo had seen his true mother
only once before, and he had no clear memory of her face. But
at last he understood the story of his birth, of how he had
been born laughing. Katharine the Scryer was a woman who could
laugh at any pain or presentiment of doom. And he, who was
indeed her son as surely as day is the child of the night, must
have inherited this loveliest of all her spirit's lovely
qualities.
  'Mi pela lot-Mudda,' Danlo whispered. 'O blessed Mother of
my blood, shantih.' Then he turned to Hanuman, tapped his
finger against the foto, and asked, 'Do you know who this man
is?'
  Hanuman, who was holding both of his arms out stiff as he
tried to keep the people away, said, That's Leopold Soli. He
was the father of the Ringess.'
Near the centre of the foto, between Katharine and Mal-
283
lory Ringess, stood a man who looked enough like the Ringess
to be his brother. He, too, had eyes of ice smashed deeply
into the bones of his sharp browridges and his long nose. He,
too, bore the family fierceness and a silent, sad look that
spoke of a too-deep contemplation of life's meaning – or lack
of meaning.
'What did you say his name is?' Danlo asked.
  There was much shouting and shoving in the crowd around
Danlo. The air was thick with burning toalache and tobacco,
body smells and curses. Someone spilled a mug of coffee over
Hanuman's boots, and the dark brown liquid instantly dripped
down and burned holes into the ice. 'Leopold Soli,' Hanuman
repeated, 'was Lord Pilot before Mallory Ringess deposed him.
It's known that Lord Soli was Mallory Ringess' father.'
 Pedar, whose boots were also dripping with splashed coffee,
touched the foto and asked, 'You've never heard of Leopold
Soli?'
 'Soli,' Danlo said softly. 'Yes, I knew a man by that name.'
 As he said this, the foto began to blur. The reds, whites and
blacks began to lose their distinctive hues, and they ran
together. As Danlo watched, the faces and images set into the
foto melted into each other and dissolved into a sea of muddy
brown.
  'Look!' Rihana said. The foto is mutating. I wonder what the
next scene will be?'
  'It's a foto of the Alaloi expedition,' Pedar explained. The
next scene is after Mallory Ringess and his family are
sculpted. Watch this.'
 Danlo couldn't help watching the transmutations occurring
beneath the foto's tough, clear, outer skin. Most of the other
boys and girls knew the story of the expedition to the Alaloi,
of how the Ringess family had been sculpted in their bodies and
faces to look like Alaloi, but for Danlo the transmutation of
civilized features into those of the rugged, primitive Alaloi
was a revelation. The sculpting of
284
 a modern human being into a Neanderthal is no easy thing, and
yet each of the six expedition members had undergone such a
sculpting in order to win the acceptance of the Devaki tribe.
Bones must be steened and thickened, muscles stimulated to
grow, the browridges built up like rock overhangs around the
eyes. New, thicker teeth must be implanted in the jaws. When
the sculpting is done, the whole face will project at a greater
angle outward from the skull. Some say the Alaloi are
brutish-looking, with their hairy limbs and their overwhelming,
open faces. Danlo, however, had always admired the primal
beauty of his adoptive brothers and sisters, even before his
brain had been imprinted with the word 'primal'. He loved the
way his blood mother, Katharine, looked after she had been
sculpted. Out of the colours and chaos of the foto, a beautiful
woman took shape and emerged. She was tall and serene, and she
wore a parka made of white shagshay fur. And she was blind no
longer. Into her beautiful face, new eyes had been sculpted.
Her eyes were blue beyond blue, eyes he had once seen in his
dreams. In truth, he had first beheld the deep blueness of her
eyes looking into the bathroom mirror in Old Father's house.
Looking at himself. 'But you have your mother's eyes,'
Three-Fingered Soli had said to him once on a cold night of
death and despair. 'Yujena oyu – eyes that see too deeply and
too much.'
  Again, Danlo said a prayer for the mother he had never
known, and then he looked at the foto's other images. To
Hanuman he said, 'Mallory Ringess – he looks splendid as an
Alaloi, yes? I wonder what it would be like, to become an
Alaloi in body and face while keeping the spirit of a civilized
man?'
 He fell quiet and thoughtful for a moment, oblivious to the
many novices discussing the scandal of his birth. And then he
pointed at the foto and said to Hanuman, 'I know this man. My
father, the father of my blood – I have seen him once before. I
have a memory, from when I was young – I was just learning to
tie the laces of my boots. In Haidar's
285
sled. My fingers were cold and it was hard to get the knot
right, but Haidar said we had to travel and that I should keep
my hands out of the wind or they would freeze and fall off.
Haidar and Wemilo took me down to the sea on their sled to meet
my blood father. He must have visited me, once. My father, the
Ringess – even sculpted as an Alaloi, he has a fierce look to
his face, yes?'
   'You are his son, aren't you?' Hanuman said. He was now
looking at Danlo intensely; there was envy, loyalty, and fear
in his stare. 'I should have known you were no common
petitioner.'
   Danlo rubbed the side of his nose and said, 'If Mallory
Ringess is the son of Leopold Soli, then Soli must be my
grandfather. Mi ur-padda. Three-Fingered Soli, my grandfather.'
He drew his fingernail along the foto until he came to the
image of a man he had known almost all his life. A fierce,
gaunt man who brooded too much – that was Leopold Soli.
Three-Fingered Soli. When the foto had mutated, the image of
Leopold Soli in his black pilot's robe had changed into
Three-Fingered Soli, the strange Alaloi man who had cut his
membrum and helped him pass into manhood on a deep winter night
now long past. Obviously, Danlo concluded, not all of the
expedition members had abandoned him at his birth. Obviously,
Three-Fingered Soli must have remained among the Alaloi in
order to watch over Danlo, to guide him through the dangers and
pains of childhood.
  There was now little doubt that Pedar had correctly guessed
Danlo's origins. Words of the Alaloi language had spilled from
his lips, and the lineaments of the Ringess (and Soli)
chromosomes were written into his face for everyone to see.
   'Well, Wild Boy?' Pedar said. He snatched the foto away from
Danlo and waved it above his head. He nodded at the crowd of
novices, most of whom were shouting, elbowing forward, and
craning their necks to get a better look. 'Well, are you the
son of Mallory Ringess?'
286
 Danlo tried to stand back, away from the many white-gloved
hands grasping at the foto. 'Yes,' he said at last. 'I am his
son.'
  Pedar picked at his neck and smiled. There was a smugness in
his smile and bloody pus staining the white leather of his
glove. 'Well, then, how can you stand here facing your fellow
novices? Aren't you ashamed?'
'Why should I be ashamed?'
'You really don't know?'
'No.'
 Pedar addressed the novices, and there was a cruel, mocking
tone to his voice, 'Why should the Wild Boy be ashamed? Who
will tell him?'
 When the novices all suddenly fell silent and no one would
speak, Pedar turned back to Danlo. 'Why should you be ashamed?
I'll tell you why – didn't you know that Katharine the Scryer
was Mallory's sister?'
'No!'
   Pedar smiled wickedly and pointed his finger at Danlo. 'Your
mother was Mallory Ringess' sister, and he swived her – he
always put himself above morality and law, so it's said.'
 From the crowd surrounding them, a voice rose above the
outraged murmuring. It was Rihana Brandreth Tal, and she too
was outraged, not at the past indiscretions of Danlo's parents,
but at Pedar's baiting Danlo. 'You speak so crudely,' she said.
  'Well, it's a crude act, to swive one's sister.' Pedar
handed the foto to Arpiar Pogossian, who was standing nearby.
Pedar made an 'O' with his finger and thumb, and he pushed the
forefinger of his other hand back and forth inside the circle,
back and forth in the universal symbol (universal among human
beings, that is) of copulation. 'So very crude, isn't that
true, Wild Boy?'
  Danlo was aware that he should probably stand there
silently, stand and face Pedar and listen to whatever taunts
or slurs he might hurl at him. But his knees and
287
hips ached to move, and he could not remain standing.
 Shaida is the man who lies with his sister, he remembered.
Shaida is the woman who –
'Well, Wild Boy?'
  There was an aching in Danlo's belly, in his throat and in
his eyes; at last he understood why the slow evil had come upon
his tribe and killed all his brothers and sisters.
Shaida is the child born of shaida.
 Suddenly, as a beast who has been brought to bay and wounded,
he knew he had to flee. He flung his hand over his eyes, gasped
for air and pushed away from the warming pavilion. Blindly, he
pushed aside several novices. He struck off onto the dazzling
whiteness of Lavi Square. His skates struck the ice in a quick,
violent staccato, flashing steel sending up sprays of
ice-powder. So quickly did he gain speed and so wild his
stroking that he knocked into the shoulder of a journeyman
pilot. He scarcely felt the jolt; he was only dimly aware of a
blackness before him, the furry blackness of the journeyman
recoiling from him, arms windmilling, falling to the ice. Danlo
didn't pause to see if the journeyman was hurt. He shot down
the gliddery into cold, hard air, and in moments he had left
Lavi Square behind him.
288



CHAPTER NINE

Multiplication by Zero

 O mighty Arjuna, even if you believe the Self to be subject
to birth and death, you should not grieve. Death is
inevitable for the living; birth is inevitable for the dead.
Since these are unavoidable, you should not sorrow. Every
creature is unmanifested at first and then attains
manifestation. When its end has come, it once again becomes
unmanifested. What is there to lament in this?
 – Lord Krishna to Arjuna, before the battle of Kunikshetra

Without plan or destination Danlo skated east through the
buildings of Borja. Just below the Hill of Sorrows, where the
flat, frozen Academy grounds give way to the icefalls and lower
slopes of the mountains, he came to a grove of trees renowned
for its beauty. It was called the shih grove; it was a
well-tended stand of one hundred and twelve shih trees imported
from Urradeth. On a stone bench beneath the silver trees, he
sat playing his shakuhachi and looking for sign of Ahira in the
deep winter sky.
I am that which should not be born, he thought.
 A short while later there came the click-clack of skates
against the grove's single gliddery. Danlo looked up to see
Hanuman gliding toward his bench. 'I had to follow you,' he
gasped out. 'But you're too quick. I thought I'd lost you. And
then I heard you playing your flute. Through the trees – the
sound of it carries, you know.'
 'Yes, I know,' Danlo said. And then he asked, 'Is it true ...
what Pedar said? Were Katharine and Mallory Ringess truly
brother and sister?'
289
 Hanuman rested the toe of his boot on the bench. The wind and
his exertions had brought his usually bone-white skin to a
scarlet flush. He nodded his head. 'Everyone knows they were.'
'Then I am an abomination.'
'Oh, Danlo.'
  'I am that which should not have come into life,' he said.
 Danlo looked off into the shadowed depths of the grove for a
long time. The shih trees were truly unique, truly beautiful.
Unlike shatterwood or yu trees, with their conical symmetry and
pointed crowns, the limbs of each shih tree branched out from a
main trunk without apparent pattern, dividing and redividing
into thousands of sub-branches. And at the end of every twig,
veined with silver and fluttering in the wind, were the
shimmering leaves, ten thousand silver-green leaves seeking out
the sun high above the ground. 'Why?' he asked. 'Why would the
Ringess lie with his own sister?'
  Hanuman shrugged his shoulders and said, 'I don't know.'
  'Shaida eth shaida,' Danlo said. And he thought, Shaida is
the man who touches his sister beneath the furs of night.
'Danlo, you are– '
  'No!' Danlo suddenly cried out. He was up on his skates, and
he smacked the shakuhachi against his thigh four times in
syncopation with each of the four terrible words he forced out:
'I ... am ... shaida ... too!'
'Danlo, you can't– '
'No, no, no, no!'
  Without care or consideration of ahimsa, Danlo reached up to
the lowest branch of the tree above the bench, and he plucked
off a single leaf. He clenched his fist, then, crushing the
leaf. Silver sap as warm as blood ran beneath his fingers. It
pained him, the sight of the tree's lifeblood spilled so
carelessly, and he closed his eyes in order to weep for the
dead leaf.
290
 'Danlo, Danlo,' he heard Hanuman's voice tighten with emotion
and die off. And then he felt Hanuman's cold fingers against
his forehead, and he opened his eyes. Hanuman quickly jerked
his hand away. He was plainly embarrassed to be caught offering
the simplest of kindnesses. (In truth, it was the first time he
had initiated such a gesture since he was five years old, when
his mother had told him he was too old to touch others in
friendship.) Danlo and Hanuman looked at each other in silent
understanding, and the only sound in the shih grove was the
whoosh and murmur of the wind through the trees.
  And then Hanuman quoted from Man's Journey: '"I love all
those who are as heavy raindrops, falling one by one out of the
dark cloud that hangs over men: they herald the advent of
lightning, and, as heralds, they suffer and perish."'
'I am the herald of death,' Danlo said.
'What do you mean?'
  'I am shaida, and that is why the shaida death came upon the
Devaki.' Danlo sat back down on the bench. Even through the fur
of his pants the stone's coldness stung his skin. He confided
to Hanuman the secret he had never thought to tell anyone: of
how the whole Devaki tribe had perished of a mysterious, shaida
fever.
'But it must have been a virus that killed your people,'
Hanuman said. 'You didn't make this virus, Danlo.'
 'No, but my ... coming into my tribe must have weakened them.
It must have touched their spirits with shaida.'
 'Oh, no, that's silly,' Hanuman said. 'You mustn't think such
thoughts.'
'The truth is the truth.'
 With a long sigh, Hanuman shook his head and murmured, 'I
don't like to see you like this.'
'I am sorry.'
 'I'm sorry about your people,' Hanuman said. 'But you have
your life and your dream. Your fate.'
Without warning, Danlo knelt down next to the
291
gliddery. With his naked finger, which was still cracked and
blackened from the labours Pedar had forced on him, he began
drawing circles in the snow. And then he said, 'O Hanu! How can
I ever become an asarya, now? How can I? To see it, dancing,
quickening, all life – how can I affirm anything if I cannot
even say "yes" to my own existence?'
'Danlo, you– '
'I was a fool, to think I could be an asarya.'
  Hanuman looked at him and shook his head. 'You – if you're a
fool, you're a splendid fool. Perhaps you're even foolish
enough to become an asarya.'
'No, that is not possible, not now.'
  'But for our kind,' Hanuman said, 'all things are possible.'
 Danlo busied himself with drawing lines in his circles. The
snow crystals were gritty and cold beneath his fingernails. In
truth, it was much too cold to be solving mathematical theorems
in the snow. He finally abandoned his effort; he looked at
Hanuman and asked, 'Do you think we are so different from
others?'
'You know that we are.'
'But Hanu, we are still people.'
 'There are people,' Hanuman said, 'and there are people.'
'The blessed ... people. All people are blessed.'
 'But few are chosen,' Hanuman said. 'All through history,
there have always been a few people destined to be something
more.'
'More ... than what?'
'More than they are. More than anybody is.'
 Danlo smiled at this and said, 'I think you are a natural
aristocrat.'
 'How not? It's only we, aristocrats in our souls, who can
know what is possible.'
'But what about the others?'
'Others are other. You mustn't think about them too
292
 much. All human society is a hierarchy. All life, this living
pyramid. It's only natural that a few human beings should stand
at the top.'
'You mean, stand on top of others.'
  'I didn't make the universe,' Hanuman said. 'I just live in
it.'
  Danlo knelt in the snow, listening to the wind fall off the
Hill of Sorrows and the icy mountains above. 'But it is hard to
live ... with the boots of others kicking at your face.'
  'Oh, yes, life is cruel,' Hanuman said. 'And to stand at the
top, one has to be a little cruel. Cruel to others – and even
crueller to oneself.'
'Cruel? You? I?'
'Oh, yes. You'll see it, if you look hard enough.'
'But, Hanu, why?'
 'Because that's the only way for people such as you and me to
become more. We look down at the others, beneath our boots.
They seem so close – but there's a vast distance between us.
Most of these people are quite content to bear us up. You might
even say our weight is a comfort to them. All they see is our
boots in their faces, and sometimes they think they hate that.
But if we were to step off them only for a moment, what then?
Then they would stand on the pyramid's apex. And the view of
all the living flesh beneath would make them sick and dizzy,
even mad. The greater the height, the greater the fall. That's
why they're glad to leave the apex to our kind. And so this
vast distance: the light-distances between the stars aren't
greater than the distance between those who love their fate and
those who fear it. Our kind are those who crave such distances.
Because it creates in us a longing for the distances within our
own souls. This is what we should live for, Danlo: the
heightening of our sensibilities, the rarefying of our desire,
the deepening of our purpose, the vastening of our selves. The
power to overcome ourselves. To be more. Or rather, to become
more. Who hasn't dreamed of such becoming?
293
But who could think to distance himself from his lower parts
without an act of cruelty?'
  Just then a blast of cold air blew through the shih grove,
rattling the tree leaves against each other. Danlo arose from
the snow and looked up through the silvery canopy above him.
The sky to the west, he saw, was no longer blue. A bank of
ice-clouds as grey as lead was moving across the sea, closing
in toward the City. Ilka-tetha, he thought, the death clouds.
  'I do not understand you,' Danlo said. He turned to Hanuman,
who was standing beneath a giant old tree. 'You like people.
And they like you. Yet you speak as if they have no value.'
'I love people,' Hanuman admitted. 'I love animals, too.'
'But people are not animals!'
  Hanuman laughed harshly, then said, 'In one sense – and this
is the only sense that really matters – most people are
nihilities. Think of Pedar. Think of his friends. They have
zero chance of becoming anything greater. Trillions of people,
trillions of Pedars – they fill the stars across the galaxy
with copies of themselves and call this the fulfilment of man's
destiny. But no, it's not. It's only multiplication by zero.'
  'But, Hanu, where would you be ... without the people who
made you?'
  'Just so,' Hanuman said. The only purpose of lower people is
to kneel down and form a pyramid so that the higher kind of man
may stand above the clouds and complete a higher task. You
mustn't think our kind are just some lucky accident of
civilization. We're the only reason for civilization. We're its
hope and meaning.'
'Oh, Hanu!'
 'It's hard, I know. To accept that people don't live their
lives for themselves – this is hard. Because living as they do,
they never really live.'
  Like a shagshay bull, Danlo kicked at the crusty old snow.
He said, 'I know about slavery. About slaves –
294
 Master Jonath told me there used to be slaves on Summerworld.'
  'Do you think it's so despicable that the higher man should
live off the lower? No, it's not. It's only natural. And
necessary. We should acknowledge this. They give us their
lives! They're an incomplete, diminished, sick, and broken
people – we should accept their sacrifice gracefully. With
gratitude. With compassion, even love.'
  For a moment, Danlo covered his eyes and looked down at the
snow. Then he said, 'Since the Day of Submission ... I have had
a taste of what slavery is like.'
 'So have I,' Hanuman said. 'But this is good, not bad.
Everyone should be a slave once in his life.'
'How so?'
  'Because this way, we know what it's like to feel the boots
on our backs. Because ever after, when we come into ourselves,
we'll have the ruthlessness to be masters.'
  Danlo stood leaning back against the trunk of a shih tree.
His fingernails drummed the icy, broken bark; the sound they
made was something like the kap, kap, kap of a mauli bird. 'I
shall never like Pedar,' he said. 'Or his friends. But ... we
are they. They are we. There is no real difference.'
  'Ahimsa,' Hanuman said, and he shook his head. 'A noble idea
that will destroy you.'
'No, it is just the opposite.'
 Hanuman shifted his boots atop the snow trying to keep warm.
He said, 'Our kind are animals, too, but we're also something
more.'
'As is Pedar.'
 'No, not really. The true juncture in evolution is not
between the animals and man. It's between man and true human
beings.'
  Because Hanuman's overweening arrogance deeply disturbed
Danlo (and because he feared that there might be some truth to
what he had said), he began wandering through the grove. There
was one tree he particularly
295
 liked, a gnarled, lightning-scarred tree whose twisted limbs
reminded him that even the life of plants was full of pain. He
paced around and around this tree, making a circle. The snow
overlying the tree's roots was old and hard, and it crunched
beneath his boots.
'All people,' Danlo said, 'are human beings.'
'All?'
  'Yes, all. Even the carked races. Even the humans some call
aliens.'
 'No, Danlo. True human beings are rare. Rarer than you might
think.'
'What is a human being, then?'
Hanuman stood quietly in the snow, then said, 'A seed.'
 'A ... seed?'
  'An acorn that is unafraid to destroy itself in growing into
a tree.'
'Then– '
  '"The true human being",' Hanuman quoted, '"is the meaning
of the universe. He is a dancing star. He is the exploding
singularity pregnant with infinite possibilities."'
 'I think the possibilities of all people are ... infinite.'
 'I love you for your faith,' Hanuman said. 'But, in truth,
I've known only two people who might possibly be human.'
  Danlo stopped suddenly and whirled around in the snow.
Hanuman was looking at him intensely, as if they were the only
two people who mattered in all the universe. 'But I am a man
just like any other,' Danlo protested. 'You and I – how are we
so different from others?'
  Hanuman bowed his head and replied, 'In our consciousnesses,
we are different. In our awareness of our deepest purpose. The
way we see too much and too deeply.'
'But Hanu– '
'The way we feel pain.'
 The way we feel pain. Danlo took in a quick gasp of air and
held it until his lungs burned with the urge to breathe. Then
everything escaped from him at once, his exploding
296
breath and his fundamental hatred of Hanuman's elitism. (And,
most of all, his anguish at his own unique qualities and
origins which separated him from all other peoples of the
Civilized Worlds.) 'What do you know about pain?' he cried out.
 'Not enough, it seems,' Hanuman said. He was standing in
front of Danlo with his arms folded across his chest,
shivering. He was also smiling. There was something both wicked
and profound in his smile. 'But I know that human beings suffer
as others do not. There's no help for it. To become greater one
must be completely ruthless toward oneself. If the eye gives
offence, it must be plucked out – do you understand? If
something is hard to do, if it is hateful, even what others
call evil – one must do that very thing precisely because it's
hateful. One must hold a red-hot fire iron to the weaker parts
of one's soul. This continual mutilation of the self – this is
pain inside pain without end.'
 Although Danlo nodded his head at Hanuman's words, he was not
really listening. Usually he listened to others with all the
concentration of an owl trying to detect sleekit scratchings
beneath the snow, but now he was staring off into the darkening
sky, remembering.
  'Without end,' Hanuman said. The pain of self-overcoming is
just the beginning. Then, for our kind, if we're strong enough,
if our souls are great and deep – then comes the real pain.
What's real pain, you ask? The power to choose what we will.
Having to choose. This terrible freedom. These infinite
possibilities. The taste for the infinite spoiled by the
possibility of evolutionary failure. Real pain is knowing that
you're going to die, all the while knowing that you don't have
to die.'
  'But, Hanu, everything dies,' Danlo said softly. He turned
to face the scarred, old shih tree, and he pressed his forehead
against it. When he looked up, he felt the zig-zag mark where
the tree's icy bark had cut into his skin.
Hanuman shook his head and continued, 'But why die
297
at all, Danlo? Mightn't there be a new phase of evolution? A
new kind of being? Can't you understand? I'm trying to
delineate an emergent quality of the brain. New synapses. New
connections. A constellation of qualities and abilities, of new
levels of existence. Consciousness heightened and exalted in
itself, purified. This pure consciousness that we really are.
That we struggle to be. For our kind, there's always the
burning to be more. The eternal longing. And this is why true
human beings feel more pain. Because we are more, but it's
never quite enough – never. And we are aware of this neverness
inside our souls. And aware of being aware. There is a
feedback. Can you understand what this is like? Pain is
magnified, infinitely. Each moment of time. Reality becomes
almost too real. It blazes. All the universe afire with the
possibilities of light, and madness, too. Real pain is the
burning that never stops, the frenzy, the lightning.'
 Standing so long in the cold had exhausted Danlo so he leaned
back against his tree. His fingers found the charred wound
where a bolt of rare winter lightning had split the tree's
bark. Frenzy and lightning, he thought. He stood there
remembering the frenzied, frothing disease that had killed his
people. The wind came up, then, carrying down the rich, ageless
smell of the mountains. It was a smell of life and death. Danlo
thought the best thing about the shih grove was the variety of
its smells: steamy sleekit droppings dotting the snow, ice,
spindrift, crushed yu berries, and the pungence of hot sap when
the wind occasionally tore the shih leaves from their branches.
Somewhere, in the rising green forests above him, a pack of
wolves must have killed a shagshay bull, or perhaps a doe. The
wind was keen with blood-scent, and it touched his nostrils
with the faint, ferny smell of a shagshay's opened entrails.
Most wolves, he remembered, liked to lick out the fermenting,
vegetable contents of a shagshay's stomach before tearing into
the liver.
'Danlo, have you heard anything I've said?'
298
  In truth, Danlo was almost beyond listening. He had his hand
up underneath his cap, rubbing his stubbly scalp as he recalled
a certain custom of the Devaki tribe: A man, when he had
unwittingly caused another injury, would make a blood-offering
to atone for the pain.
'Danlo?'
 Anaslia, he remembered, was the Devaki word for the sharing
of pain.
'Please, Danlo. Look at me.'
 But Danlo was now looking down, searching with his eyes for
stones. Surrounding them was a circle of footprints broken
through layers of snow. In a few places, his boots had exposed
the ground. He dropped to the snow, and with his cold, stiff
fingers he prised loose a roundish white stone and chunk of
granite. Quickly, precisely, he hammered the stone against the
edge of the granite. A sharp piece of granite the size of a
shih leaf flaked off. It was poor quality stone to cut with,
but since he didn't have any flint or obsidian to make a proper
knife, he shrugged his shoulders, grasped the flake between his
fingers and brought the point of it up against his forehead. He
slashed himself from his stubbly hairline to his eyebrow. He
cut deeply, diagonally across his forehead, down to the bone.
He cut skin and veins, and his blood flowed over his eyebrows
and fell in streams to the snow.
 'What are you doing!' Hanuman cried out as he rushed through
the snow and knelt at Danlo's side. 'Oh, what have you done?'
 Danlo tried to turn away from Hanuman. With rigid fingers he
held open the wound, the better to let as much blood as
possible touch the world. It would require many heartbeats of
blood to atone for the deaths of Haidar, Chandra and his
near-brothers. Of course, he knew it was impossible to share
the death-agony of a whole tribe of people – no one had that
much blood inside. Shaida is the who brings death to his
people. No, he could never undo the Devaki's death; he could
not even undo his own shaida
299
life, for he knew it was not the right time to die. But he
could give his blood to the dead. He could give them his pain.
Across Danlo's bleeding forehead and behind his eyes was a
whole universe of pain.
  'Danlo, Danlo!' Hanuman began scooping up handfuls of snow
and holding the frozen white mounds against Danlo's forehead
to sop up the blood. There was too much blood, however, and
the snow quickly turned to red slush in his hands. 'Oh, God!'
he repeated again and again. 'Oh, God, my God!'
 Danlo's head wound must have recalled terrible images of his
own father's death – his murder – in the family reading room,
because Hanuman was suddenly frantic with fear. 'Danlo,
Danlo!' he said. 'What have you done?' He fumbled with the
zipper of his furs, prised the stone flake from Danlo's bloody
fingers, and used it to hack a piece of cloth from his
woollens. This cloth he bound around Danlo's head beneath the
ruff of his blood-spattered cap.
'I was just giving blood to the dead,' Danlo explained.
  'Oh, no, not now!' Hanuman said. He grasped at Danlo's
shoulder. 'Come, quickly; we've got to get you to a cutter
before you bleed to death!'
 'Wait,' Danlo said. Even though the pain above his eye was
hot and intense, even though blood was soaking the makeshift
bandage so quickly that it wouldn't freeze, he knew that scalp
wounds were rarely as serious as they appeared. 'Wait,' he
repeated, looking at Hanuman. 'Your face – your blessed face!'
  It is astonishing that the look on a person's face can
change the universe. Or rather, what is behind that look. In
the pull of Hanuman's elegant brow muscles, in the trembling of
the too-sensitive lips, there was something new, something
Danlo had never expected to see. Terrible , he thought. All
across Hanuman's face were the terrible and beautiful marks of
compassion. Of anaslia. Anaslia was the Devaki word for
compassion: it meant,
300
 literally, 'suffering with'. And how Hanuman suffered! In
truth, Danlo could not bear to look at him just then, with his
silent, anguished face and his hooded eyes. There was something
involuted and heartbreaking in his friend's compassion for him.
Something twisted.
  Danlo lifted his head, then, looking away, looking up at the
black, infinite depths behind the blueness of the sky. He was
suddenly afraid of something. Although he could not quite
articulate this fear, could not bring it to mind as a concept
made up of words, deep in his belly was an acid dread that he
had awakened (or created) in Hanuman a twisted compassion far
more terrible than beautiful.
  'What are you looking at?' Hanuman asked. His eyes were
watery with tears; they were like twin, pale mirrors quavering
in the cold.
 Anashaida – this is what Danlo's deepest self called to him;
beware the twisted compassion that would change both their
lives and perhaps the future of all living things.
'Danlo? Oh, God, my God, why won't the bleeding stop!'
  Again Hanuman cut a cloth strip from his shirt and replaced
Danlo's sodden red bandage.
  'Push it against my head.' Danlo grunted as he met Hanuman's
eyes with his own. Tightly – the pressure will stop the
bleeding.'
  'Like this?' Hanuman asked as he pressed his palm to Danlo's
forehead.
'Yes, that is good.'
 'It's still bleeding!' Hanuman called out. His furs were open
to the wind; his woollens had been hacked into rags, and he was
shivering violently. His teeth began to chatter, making a
tecka, tecka, tecka sound. 'My ... God I've never ... seen so
much ... blood!'
  He was standing close to Danlo, and his little hand was hard
against Danlo's forehead. Danlo felt his carbon dioxide breath,
in ragged hot jets, fall over his face. He said. That is good.
Thank you.'
Hanuman relaxed his grip slowly before letting go
301
altogether. He looked at his glove, now blood-stained and
ruined. He made a fist and punched the air. 'Why can't you
apply this rule of ahimsa to yourself?' he said. And then, 'Why
did Pedar have to show you that silly foto?'
'It was not Pedar who killed the Devaki,' Danlo said.
'No.'
 No – such a simple sentiment and declaration, and Danlo
thought that he had never listened to a word uttered with so
much contempt.
'Please,' he said, 'you must not blame Pedar. He is just– '
 'He's a nihility,' Hanuman said. 'He tries to shame you
because he can't bear his own shame. His weakness, his
ignobility. He can't bear his suffering, either, as feeble as
it is. And so he tries to share it with you.'
'And you hate him for that.'
 'How should I not? Between his kind and ours, there's always
been enmity and war.'
'But the law of ahimsa requires– '
 'Ahimsa!' Hanuman snapped. His face was white with fury.
That's no law for a human being!'
'But never killing– '
  'Listen, Danlo, please: "Do what thou wilt shall be the
whole of the law."'
'But ... whose law?'
'Our law.'
'O blessed Hanu!'
  With his hand flung up to his forehead, Danlo turned to the
west where the sun was lost behind the clouds. He covered his
eyes then, trying to listen to what Hanuman was saying: 'A few
human beings prepared by evolution, each with unique abilities
... your own father, Mallory Ringess ... this ontogenesis of
man into god, the genius to create a true self.' Hanuman's
smooth words of explanation barely penetrated the dome of
sound enclosing Danlo. In the sky, somewhere, an ivory gull
called to his mate. This hrark-hrarking cry frightened the
teal-eyes in their winter nests; the trees were full of
fluttering wings
302
 and a nervous warbling which fell out into the air. A fresh,
strong wind swooped down the mountain in a steady flow over
the scree fields and glaciers; it rushed through the shih
leaves, thousands of shih leaves vibrating like sheets of
silver, almost ringing in the wind. Danlo submerged himself in
these sounds, but finally, he couldn't ignore the brilliance
of Hanuman's voice:
  '... the true self, discovering it, the true will to one's
fate.' These quick, clever words filled him with dread and
made his blood jump along his veins. Hanuman, more than any
person he had ever seen, had an urge to embrace the future, to
love his fate no matter how tragic or terrible.
 Ti-miura halla, he thought. Follow your fate, follow your
deepest will to life. Only, what if one's will led to the ruin
of other life?
  They left the Shih Grove, then, skating below the icefalls
and the great, looming ice sculptures of the Elf Gardens.
Hanuman still wanted to escort Danlo to the college's
infirmary, but Danlo did not want to explain the meaning of his
gashed forehead, and so the two of them made their way along
the Academy's easternmost gliddery to Perilous Hall. There, in
the deserted fourth floor bathing room, Hanuman glued shut the
flaps of skin lying ragged and open against Danlo's skull. But
he applied the pungent shaving glue inexpertly: ever after,
when Danlo's wound had healed, above his left eye he would bear
a vivid scar shaped like the zig-zag of a lightning bolt.
 'Thank you,' Danlo said when they were done. 'Shantih.' Since
it was too late in the afternoon to resume their studies, Danlo
sat on his bed playing his shakuhachi, brooding over the
strange events of the day.
  'Do you feel faint?' Hanuman asked as he pulled on his spare
set of woollens and gloves. 'Does it hurt very much?'
  'It throbs,' Danlo admitted. 'But between heartbeats, there
is no pain.'
'Shall I bring you back an analgesic or narcotic?'
303
 Danlo shook his head as he forced a laugh. The slight back
and forth motion sent a pounding surge of pain into his skull.
And then he asked, 'Where are you going?'
'I have a few errands to make before dinner,' Hanuman said.
 That evening was the strangest Danlo had spent since taking
up residence in Perilous Hall. After their daily games of
hokkee and bump-and-skate, the other boys returned to the
dormitory. A couple of them – Madhava li Shing and Sherborn of
Darkmoon – tried to engage him in conversation. But when they
saw the jagged wound on his forehead and beheld the private
passion with which he played the shakuhachi, they left him
alone. They went down to eat their dinners, where they were
joined by Hanuman and the boys from the other three floors.
Danlo went hungry that night. And so he was not present to
witness the tension as Pedar and his friends sat down at one of
the long dining tables to a meal of cultured meats, bread,
fruit and ice-wine. He never saw, with his own eyes, the
expression of guilt and mortification on Pedar's face when boys
at every table began clinking their wine glasses together and
speaking in awed, hushed tones of Danlo's lineage. While the
others sipped their wine three floors below him, he remained
sitting cross-legged on his bed, playing his bamboo flute, and
he never suspected that Pedar's plan to humiliate him had gone
awry. Indeed, the novices – and many of the journeymen and
masters of the Academy as well – were enchanted with the idea
of his being the bastard son of a god. In the cold, deserted
sleeping chamber, he played his music alone, and with every
breath taken and then released into his flute's cool, ivory
mouthpiece, he felt a hollowness inside him, a terrible doubt
and presentiment of doom. He should have paid close attention
to these feelings. He was the son of Katharine the Server,
after all, and he had inherited some of his mother's
sensitivity to the future. He should have seen the dark,
chaotic images inside him as visions of moments
304
 soon to be. (Or as vivid omens that Ahira had put into his
third eye behind his forehead.) But he closed his eyes and
played his shakuhachi, and in the flute's bottomless sound was
a dread and estrangement that recalled only the tragedies of
the past.
 Later, long after the evening bells had rung and all the
novices had returned, bathed and shaved, and were safe in their
beds, Danlo slept fitfully. He had dreams. In truth, his sleep
was with nightmare, a hellish time of twisting and turning
between his hot sheets. His descent into the molten, blood-red
sea of dreamspace was excruciating and endless. It seemed he
would never wake up. And then there was a screaming. 'Go away,
go away!' Deep within the muscle-lock of nightmare, he thought
that he, himself, must be screaming. Suddenly, with a terrible
snap, he came to consciousness trembling and slick with sweat.
There was total blackness around him, and the silence spread
over the sleeping chamber was as deep and cold as ice.
But only for a moment.
  'Light the flame globes!' someone shouted, and the lights
came on. Hanuman, in the bed next to his, was sitting bolt
upright, blinking, looking down the row of beds toward the
centre of the chamber. All the boys were now awake, and every
one had his head turned to the dark, open stairwell leading to
the lower floors. From the stairwell came muffled cries and
sounds of panic. 'He looks like he fell!' a voice from the
second floor echoed into the room. And then, other voices, a
whole sea of frightened voices as the panic spread from floor
to floor and the dormitory came awake: 'He's dead, look at all
the blood! He fell down the stairs! Look at him, he's dead!'
  Danlo was the first to jump out of his bed and rush down the
winding stairway; Hanuman and Madhava li Shing followed
groggily behind him. As if a signal had been given, each floor
emptied of boys wanting to see who had fallen down the infamous
stairs of Perilous Hall.
'Send for a cutter!' someone called out.
305
  'No, a cryologist. Freeze the body – maybe the cryologists
can bring him back.'
  And then another voice answered him, 'It's too late. He's
beyond help – can't you see he's bashed out his brains?'
  When Danlo reached the bottom of the stairs and pushed his
way through the gathering circle of high novices, he came upon
an incredible sight. There, in the centre of the first floor's
main hall, crushed against the grey floorstones, was the body
of Pedar Sadi Sanat. He had apparently fallen headfirst down
the stairwell: His face had been smashed to the meat, and his
skull had come apart against the sharp edges of the two bottom
steps. Danlo wouldn't have recognized him if it hadn't been for
the boils and pimples on his broken neck. He stood over Pedar's
body and then tilted his head back. The stairway was a dark
grey ribbon of stone winding around and above him. And on
almost every step, there was a curious novice looking over the
stairway's inner edge. In the light of the cold flame globes
their skulls gleamed with greens and reds, a spiral of sixty
rainbow skulls staring down at him. The sight of the boys'
horrified faces disoriented Danlo and made him feel dizzy.
  'How could he have fallen? He was always so careful on the
steps!' This came from Rafael Wu, the boy whose fingers Danlo
had kicked and broken during his torment in the first floor
bathing room. Rafael, too, stood over Pedar's body. Next to him
was Arpiar Pogossian, who was yawning as he rubbed his thick
neck. They both looked at Danlo. 'Did you push him, Wild Boy?'
 Danlo pressed his fist into the pit of his naked belly;
across the hall, the main door of the dormitory was ajar,
banging against the jamb with each gust of wind, and he stood
there naked and shivering in the draught. Unlike the other
boys, all of whom wore long, quilted sleeping robes, he always
slept naked. 'Never killing or hurting another,' he whispered,
'not even in one's thoughts.'
'What did you say?' Rafael wanted to know.
Arpiar Pogossian shouldered Rafael aside and looked at
306
 Danlo. 'I don't think the Wild Boy pushed him. I was awake
when Pedar went up to the fourth floor. I heard what he
shouted, didn't anyone else? It was something like, "Monsters,
they're all bloody, monsters go away!" Didn't anyone else hear
Pedar screaming about monsters?'
  As it happened, at least four other boys had heard Pedar
screaming about monsters. The boys all began to talk at once, a
cacophony of voices shouting from floor to floor:
'He must have tripped.'
'Why did he trip?'
 'If you hallucinated a bloody monster in the middle of the
night, you'd trip, too.'
  'Who cares if he did trip? He shouldn't have been on the
stairs after lights out.'
'That's right!'
'He was on his way up to see Danlo.'
'I'm glad he's dead.'
 'Quiet now – how would you like to fall on your thin head?'
  Arpiar Pogossian shrugged his shoulders sadly and looked at
Rafael. 'I told him a hundred times he should purge himself of
the jook.'
  While Arpiar and Rafael debated the hallucinogenic
properties of jook and other drugs that Pedar had been fond of,
Hanuman threaded his way down the steps. He came up to Danlo,
and his face was as white as ice. He was carrying a sleeping
robe, which Danlo pulled on and zipped closed. Everyone stood
around, occasionally glancing at Pedar (or trying not to); no
one wanted to touch the body. Many of the boys had never seen a
dead person before, and no one seemed to know what to do.
 Never killing, Danlo thought as he looked at Pedar. It is to
die oneself than kill.
 He turned to Hanuman, half expecting him to be ill at the
sight of so much blood. But Hanuman's face was empty of
emotion and impossible to read.
Just then, the great wooden doors banged open. Bardo
307
 the Just, accompanied by the novice who had gone to inform
him of Pedar's accident, strolled into the hallway. Bardo's
eyes were bleary and bloodshot, and a patina of snow sparkled
atop his fur cape. He looked impatient, as if he had been
disturbed from sex or sleep. With his massive black-gloved
hand, he rubbed his eyes, rubbed his bulging forehead, and
lastly, he rubbed the condensation droplets from his bulbous
purple nose. 'By God, one of my boys is dead!' he boomed. 'Too
bad.'
  Bardo walked slowly, measuredly through the hallway. High on
the walls, halfway to the high, arched ceiling, the cold flame
globes were all ablaze. Their light spilled out over a row of
paintings, dreamy landscapes of Old Earth, Arcite and Icefall.
Spaced evenly between the paintings, every ten feet or so, were
rosewood stands holding up the busts of famous pilots and
academicians, all of whom had once been novices in Perilous
Hall. Tradition,' Bardo's huge voice thundered, 'tradition
demands that I execute an inquest as to this poor boy's death.
Who can tell me how he fell?'
 For a short while – a very short while considering the
gravity of the moment – he questioned Danlo, Hanuman, Arpiar
and various other boys. Some of them, those from the second and
third floors, he sent immediately back to their beds. He
strolled up and down the hallway, and at last, he knelt above
Pedar. He looked up the stairwell, measuring angles and
distances with his quick brown eyes. He noted the brain matter
spread over steps and stones, and the blood. Pedar's head and
torso were practically floating in a puddle of blood. A nervous
boy named Timin Wang, in the first moments of confusion after
Pedar had screamed, in the dark had stepped in the blood and
tracked it about the hall. Little bloody footprints led past
the first floor sleeping chamber to the bathing room where
Timin had reportedly washed the blood from his feet. Bardo
measured Timin's answers to his questions, just as he weighed
and evaluated Madhava li Shing's assertion that
308
 both Danlo and Hanuman had been in bed at the time of the
fall. He came to an immediate, official (and quite mistaken)
judgement as to the events of Pedar's death: sometime after
dinner, on the 64th night of deep winter in the year 2947,
Pedar had decided to apologize to Danlo for all the injustices
he had inflicted upon him. He had come to this surprising
decision because he could see that Danlo, no matter how he
tried to hurt or defame him, was destined to become a popular
boy, perhaps even a famous and powerful man. And, in truth,
Danlo's toughness and faithfulness to ahimsa had changed Pedar.
In the Fravashi manner, Danlo sought always to reflect the best
parts of everyone he met, even his enemies. Pedar, in knowing
Danlo, had finally seen himself as he might be: bright, devoted
to truth rather than vengeance, magnanimous in defeat. And so
Pedar vowed to make a public apology. As was his habit, after
everyone had gone to sleep, he started up the steps to rouse
Danlo from his bed. (Pedar, of course, could not wholly rid
himself of cruelty merely by wishing it so. Pedar – this is
what Arpiar Pogossian told Bardo the Just – wanted to frighten
Danlo out of his sleep one last time only to surprise him with
an apology and offer of friendship. This is why he stole up the
stairs like a slel necker in the night.) Somewhere near the top
of the stairs, however, well above the third floor, he
hallucinated his 'bloody monsters'. Most likely he slipped in
panic and thus fell to his death.
  'It's too bad,' Bardo declared. 'It's a pity, ironic and
pitiful, but no one is to blame but Pedar himself.'
 'Shantih,' Danlo whispered. 'Mi alasharia la shantih.' He
looked at Hanuman, who was still staring at Pedar. There was
neither blame nor compassion in his friend's pale blue eyes.
There was nothing but death.
  'I think he hated himself,' Hanuman said softly. 'At least
he won't have to suffer himself any more.'
 Just then Bardo sighed and ambled over to Danlo. He bent his
head low so that only Danlo would hear what he
309
 said. 'I must speak with you soon, Danlo wi Soli Ringess.
Perhaps tomorrow or the day after,' he turned to look once
again at the stairs of Perilous Hall and muttered, 'Ah, too
bad.'
 A couple of journeyman cutters arrived with a sled then and
took Pedar's body away. Arpiar Pogossian and his friends
brought out mops, buckets and solvents which would disassemble
and digest the bloodstains from the floor – this was one very
personal piece of work they didn't intend to foist off onto the
first year novices. Bardo reminded everyone that there would be
a requiem the following evening in the Sanctuary, and he sent
them off to bed.
  That night Danlo did not sleep. Beneath sheets and blankets
as soft as snow, beneath the black, oppressive silence of the
sleeping chamber, he lay awake repeating in his mind Master
Bardo's words: There is no one to blame but himself.' But Danlo
did blame. He, of all the novices, cutters, and masters, was
sure he knew the genesis of Pedar's death.
 Shaida is the way of the man who kills other men, he thought.
 Once, on a night of despair much like this night, as he lay
waiting in his bed for the slap of Pedar's boots against the
stairs, he had envisioned him slipping and falling like a stone
into the black, icy ocean. He had willed his death. It was the
oldest and most basic of principles: the songs that one sings
inside the heart correspond and resonate with the greater world
outside. One single time he had broken ahimsa, harmed Pedar in
his thoughts, and now the boy was dead.
Shaida is the cry of the man who has lost his soul.
  For a long time he wept silently into the dark, and he was
glad that Hanuman was asleep and couldn't see the blankets
quivering with each sob and spasm of his belly. Hanuman was
sleeping, he thought, and so there would be no more sharing of
agony that night. But after a long
310

 while, sometime near dawn, Hanuman began crying out in
nightmare, 'No, no, Father, please no!'
 Danlo whispered, 'Hanu, Hanu,' and then he got out of bed,
leaned over Hanuman's sweating, stricken face and covered his
mouth. 'Shantih, be quiet now, or you will wake the others.'
  He thought that Hanuman, too, must have suffered over
Pedar's death. He stood barefoot in the dark draughty chamber,
looking down at Hanuman. He listened as the wind howled outside
the dormitory and gusts of air beat against the clary windows;
their rattle almost drowned out Hanuman's muffled cries. He
touched Hanuman's forehead; he felt the heat of his friend's
skin and the burning of his own wounded forehead. And then,
deep inside, he knew the truth. Hanuman suffered not for Pedar
but for him. Anashaida, twisted love and compassion – this is
what Danlo's deep self cried in the very centre of his being.
 'Shhh!' he said softly. He bowed his head, pressed his hand
over Hanuman's lips and whispered, 'Shantih, my brother, go to
sleep.'
311
CHAPTER TEN

The Library

 What is language but a mirror of the natural world allowing
us to define, discuss and understand the events and
relationships of the elements of the world? If mathematics is
seen as a refinement of the natural languages – a
crystallization of language's metaphors, concepts and
relationships into a symbol system of great logical precision
– then what is mathematics if not the progressive polishing
of this mirror? I would like to speculate as to the process
and purpose of this polishing. I believe we must learn the
infinite subtleties and the deepest logic of language. I
believe we must become true speakers of the Word. When we
have learned to speak of all possible connections between all
things, then we may extend the metaphors of language into an
infinite number of new relationships and forms. Only then
will we be able to make a new mathematics. Only then will we
create a perfect mirror in our words and thus make a grammar
for all nature that will be truly universal.
 – from the diary of Omar Narayama

According to the Order's canons, the body of Pedar Sadi Sanat
should have been buried in an icy grave with the other deceased
novices in Borja's main cemetery. But Pedar had family who
lived in the shabbier districts of the Farsider's Quarter, and
this family – his father, mother, uncles, cousins, nephews and
nieces – was harijan. They took his body away to be burned in
one of their barbaric, secret ceremonies. They also lodged a
formal petition demanding a deeper investigation of Pedar's
death. As
312
 harijan, of course, they had no power to petition or make
demands of any sort. Or rather, they had only one real power,
which was universally feared: They were wont to riot and
mutilate themselves when ignored or treated unjustly.
Occasionally, at times of crisis, in public places such as the
Great Circle outside the Hofgarten, harijan soak their robes in
their holy sihu oil and set each other afire. They do this to
bully and shame the Lords of the Order into allowing them
certain privileges. And so this melodramatic sect is despised
as the lowest of humanity: a poor, dreamy, displaced people who
come to Neverness seeking the easy drug satoris or the
simulated realities of the computer spaces. It was ironic that
Bardo the Just, who regarded most men as his social, moral and
intellectual inferiors, had always had a strange sympathy for
the harijan. Too, too ironically, as Bardo would say, Pedar's
family blamed him for allowing Pedar to die. Because the
harijan petition accused Bardo of malfeasance, he was kept busy
defending his actions (or lack of action) to the College of
Lords when they met to discuss the 'harijan problem'. He was
very busy, too busy, in fact, to see Danlo during the cold,
confused days following the tragedy in Perilous Hall.
  'I've been to the Sanctuary five times,' Danlo complained to
Hanuman one night before sleeping. 'Master Bardo is never
there. How can he tell me the truth about my mother and father
if he is never there?'
 'You're the son of a man who became a god,' Hanuman said. He
was sitting on his bed with his chess pieces spread out across
sixty-four white and black squares. He had taken on both sides
and was playing a game with himself, against himself. He seemed
intensely absorbed in this game. Since Pedar's death, he had
been withdrawn, yet even more intensely alive than before, in
his secretive and anguished manner. 'Your father is Mallory
Ringess – what more is there to know?'
Danlo bowed his head as he remembered burying his
313
 adoptive brothers and sisters in the snow above the Devaki
cave. There is everything to know,' he said.
  'Are you thinking of your people, Danlo? The Devaki people?'
'Yes.'
 'You mustn't blame your father for what happened to them.'
 'I ... do not want to blame him.'
 'Nor should you blame yourself for what happened to Pedar.'
 Danlo looked up suddenly and said, 'You know me too well I
think.'
 'It was his fate to fall,' Hanuman said. 'It was just an
accident.'
'But the harijan do not believe it was an accident.'
'The harijan are free to believe what they want.'
  'I have heard,' Danlo said, 'that some of the lords also do
not believe it was an accident.'
 From the corner of the board, Hanuman picked up the salt
shaker that substituted for the chess set's missing white god;
he slid it over one square, making his move. He appeared
relaxed and nonchalant, almost uncaring. 'It's true,' he said.
The Lords Jurasek and Ciceron are calling for an akashic's
inquest.'
 'The akashics, with their computers – they can look into any
part of one's mind, yes?'
'Perhaps,' Hanuman said.
 'Then Lord Ciceron might order us before the akashic courts.
To see if any of us might know why Pedar died.'
  'But you mustn't worry about this,' Hanuman said. 'Bardo has
promised that he won't allow any novice to submit to the
akashic courts.'
  'I ... think I know why Pedar died,' Danlo said. He looked
at Hanuman for a long time, and then bent his head as he rubbed
above his eyes.
 Just then Hanuman finished his chess game, and he tipped over
the salt shaker in token of defeat. It clacked
314
 against the wooden board, and tiny cubes of salt spilled out
of it and bounced across the black and white squares. He stared
at these hundreds of salt crystals, then asked softly, 'And why
did he die?'
  In a quiet voice that would not carry through the dormitory
and alarm the other novices, in broken streams of words heavy
with memory and shame, Danlo told of how he had broken ahimsa
and willed Pedar's death. When he was finished speaking, he
picked up the salt shaker and began using its heavy bottom to
grind bits of salt into white dust.
 'But you must never regret what you willed,' Hanuman said.
'Or what you thought. A man's thoughts are his own.'
  He went on to assure Danlo that there were no mind crimes in
Neverness, unless, of course, one belonged to one of the
Cybernetic Churches. 'You must know that in the Church's
cleansing ceremony, akashic computers are used. To read one's
thoughts, even the most secret parts of the soul. But there are
always ways to evade such computers.'
'What ... ways?'
 'Ways,' Hanuman said, and his eyes fell clouded and opaque as
the salt dust covering his chess board. 'It's said that the
cetics know ways to control any computer. The ways of the
cetics, the mind yogas that they teach their students.'
'But we will never be cetics,' Danlo said.
  'Whatever we will be or not, you mustn't worry about an
akashic inquest. There's really no reason to worry.'
  Danlo kept grinding grains of salt with the blunt bottom of
the shaker. He nodded his head but said nothing.
  'Just now, it is Bardo who must worry, not us,' Hanuman
said. 'It's silly, but certain lords are blaming him for
Pedar's death. The harijan blame him, too.'
'But why?'
315
  'For allowing the Head Novice to assign you to submit to
Pedar. For allowing the enmity between you and Pedar to
proceed so far. And, of course, for allowing Pedar to climb
the stairs every night to our room.'
  'I am sorry ... that I have brought Bardo so much trouble.'
 'Oh, no,' Hanuman said. 'It is Bardo who always brings
himself trouble. Just as Bardo, being Bardo, will always find
a way out.'
  'But what if the Lords' College rebukes him? What if someone
else is made Master of Novices?'
  'What if some star near Neverness explodes into a supernova
tomorrow and kills us all?' Hanuman said. 'You might as well
worry about the harijan hiring assassins to avenge Pedar's
death.'
 Danlo looked up suddenly and asked, 'Do you worry about this,
Hanu?'
 For a while Hanuman looked down at his chess board, then
laughed awkwardly. 'I think you know me too well,' he said.
'But the harijan don't hire assassins!'
 'Once upon a time, it's said, a hundred years ago, they
assassinated the Lord Librarian. When she forbade the harijan
to use any of the Order's libraries.'
 'I had heard ... that it was the Timekeeper who ordered the
Lord Hinda's death. And then blamed this crime on the harijan.'
'Perhaps,' Hanuman said.
  'But even if the harijan wanted to assassinate somebody,
they are too poor to afford an assassin. They do not have any
money.'
 'Perhaps,' Hanuman said again. He bent his head down and
pursed his lips as he blew the salt powder off his chess board.
Then with quick motions of his little hands, he began setting
the pieces on their squares in preparation for a new game. The
truth is, I can't believe the harijan would assassinate Bardo –
or anyone else. Now, would you care
316
 for a game before lights out, or do you intend to worry all
night about these poor harijan? I'm sure Pedar's family won't
ruin their sleep worrying about you or me.'
 But even as Danlo and Hanuman played their game of chess on
the fourth floor of Perilous Hall – and for many days
previously – the family of Pedar Sadi Sanat had taken note of
their names. With friends and far relatives, they had talked
about the novices Danlo wi Soli Ringess and Hanuman li Tosh,
and so in decrepit rooms and apartments in the Farsider's
Quarter of the City, these two names came to be passed among
many harijan who had no real interest in Pedar's death. But
people can always find a way to enhance their self-interest out
of others' misfortunes, and so Danlo's and Hanuman's names were
eventually passed along to wormrunners and seekers of
information who usually have few dealings with the harijan
sect. Although these few hundred harijan could not have
foreseen the results of their waggling tongues, it was this
name-passing that led directly to the terrible incident (and to
Danlo's terrible discovery) that occurred ten days later at the
Academy's main library.
 For Danlo, his visit to the library on the 81st of deep
winter was no everyday event. Or rather, his reason for using
the library was unusual and connected to what he had learned
from Pedar in Lavi Square: he wanted to learn more about the
galaxy's gods; specifically, he wanted to know if his father's
ontogenesis from man into god was halla or shaida. Hanuman's
reasons for accompanying Danlo that day were perhaps as deep,
but he made a secret of his true purpose, and he would not
reveal whatever mysterious information it was that he sought.
As on other days, early in the afternoon, they skated over to
the library, which lies between Borja and the dark, densely
arrayed buildings of the academician's college, Lara Sig. The
library itself is the darkest of structures. From its eastern
entrance, where the sparkling red glidderies from different
parts of the Academy converge, it looms as an almost
featureless
317
 wall of grey-black basalt. In truth, it is an ugly thing, with
its square-cut angles and exact rectilinearity. There are five
floors to the library, but only the top floor of the west wing
is graced with windows. The effect of this monolithic blackness
is to make one feel small, to diminish one's vanity and
conceit; it reminds human beings that their precious intellects
are as nothing before the acquired wisdom of the ages. The
novices, journeymen and masters passing beneath the massive
doorway cannot forget that they must serve the vast edifice of
Knowledge and, someday, if they are brilliant enough, add to it
brick by brick. Although the doors – two massive, rectangular
slabs of basalt hung in perfect balance – almost always stand
open, the library is a forbidding place to approach and one
does not enter it easily. Eighty-one steps lead from the ice of
the main gliddery to the doorway. The steps, too, are all of
basalt, a dense, dreary stone which can turn quite slippery
when wet. For thousands of years, the lower steps have been
carved with graffiti: parallel wavy lines, circles,
pictographs, the interlocking triangles of the Solomon's Seal
and other symbols. The many curlicues and grooves provide good
traction for wet boots, but they had not been placed there so
that academicians could climb more safely. Most of the symbols,
in fact, are harijan signs. Throughout Neverness, across all
the cities of the Civilized Worlds, the harijan sect have
affixed their various signs to libraries, restaurants,
hospices, shops and even private houses. There are hundreds of
these signs, and they denote the kinds of information vital to
any itinerant harijan: use of brain machines free and
unrestricted; a good place for a meal, coffee and conversation;
tortrix in use, beware!; free drugs available in exchange for
services; and so on. If one is familiar with the signs, it is
possible to stand facing the eighty-one steps and decipher the
history of the relations between the Order and the harijan. The
oldest signs mark the lowest steps; three thousand years of
snow and ice (and the tread of leather boots) have worn them
nearly
318
 smooth. Information free to all! – this is a typical
invitation of the earliest and most blurred of chisellings. As
one proceeds up the steps, the signs become more and more
distinct, and progressively more chary of the possibilities to
be found in the Order's main library. Many of the middling-old
signs, which date from the time of the War of Assassins, warn
that the library's information pools are heavily censored, or
restricted to guests of the Order. On the highest steps cut
with the most recent graffiti, the meaning is plain: Guarded
information pools!; Outsiders forbidden!
  At the top of the steps, between two huge pillars holding up
the library's frontispiece, Danlo and Hanuman bowed to the
seven librarians lined-up in their formal indigo robes. One of
them, a remarkably ugly woman, stopped them before they could
approach the great doors. Her name was Lillith Volu. Danlo had
met her and the other journeyman librarians earlier in winter.
Lillith glared at them with strabismic eyes, which were of an
ochre colour and fairly popping out of her head. Like the stone
gargoyles set atop the famous Jacarandan temple walls, she
glared at everyone who tried to pass by her.
  'Please give me your names,' Lillith said. Her voice grunted
deeply, as if she were a silk belly sow in rut. And she had a
sow's nose: huge, hairy nostrils which she could open or close
at will. Danlo could scarcely believe her claim, that the
peoples out near Primula Luz had once bred for such facial
deformations according to the dictates of a religious code long
since forgotten.
'But Lillith, you know me, yes?'
 Danlo, with his fine memory, found it only natural that
Lillith should remember him after a single meeting some one
hundred and eighty days earlier. In fact, he hadn't seen her
since then. During his previous visits to the library, various
other journeymen on duty had subjected him to these hated
formalities. Of course, Lillith did recognize his voice and
face, but only because a remembrancer
319
 had trained her to identify all of the Academy's novices by
sight.
  'Please give me your names,' she said again in her brusque,
insolent manner.
 On the steps behind Danlo and Hanuman, a group of people were
queued up, waiting for them to speak. There was a red-faced
master horologe, impatient and severe in his red robes, a
haikuist who had the haggard, disoriented look of someone who
had recently experienced too much computer simulation, and
three high novices fresh from a game of hokkee in the Ice Dome.
Danlo smelled their clean, salty sweat; they stood on the cold
steps chatting, jumping up and down and blowing puffs of steam
as they looked back and forth between Hanuman and him.
  'I'm Hanuman li Tosh,' Hanuman said as he stepped ahead of
Danlo.
'Very well, then – you may pass,' Lillith said.
  Danlo smiled at Lillith before saying, 'And I am Danlo.
Everyone calls me ... Danlo the Wild.'
  Lillith smoothed her robe over her squat, lumpy torso and
said, 'Danlo wi Soli Ringess – this is your full name, isn't
it?'
 At the base of the nearest pillar, sheet ice was frozen to
the rounded stone fillets. Danlo kicked at the ice. A piece
cracked off and went skittering down the steps. 'Yes,' he said.
He was embarrassed that everyone seemed to have heard the news
about his lineage. 'Danlo ... wi Soli Ringess.'
  'You will please state your proper name each time before you
are admitted,' Lillith said. 'Is this agreeable to you?'
'Yes,' Danlo said.
'Then you may pass.'
  Lillith's formality and seriousness amused Danlo as much as
it irked him, and so again he smiled at her, then bowed just a
little too deeply. He turned and followed Hanuman through the
great doorway into the library's main hallway. This was a huge
room of polished stone,
320
 stale air and semi-darkness. Despite the circle of cold flame
globes suspended above the central fountain (or perhaps because
of their flickering bronze and cobalt lights) it was hard to
make out the robe colours of the professionals hurrying to and
fro. Danlo could not tell the eschatologists, with their blue
robes, from the librarians. Still following Hanuman, he stepped
past archaic scrolls and manuscripts preserved in airless clary
crypts; they made their way toward the far wall, where the west
wing gave out into the hallway. There they found three master
librarians sitting on benches inside their little alcove. Danlo
knew they must be librarians because they all looked up at them
with a pallid, helpful look, as if their only purpose in life
was to attend young novices.
  Again Danlo gave his name, his full name, and asked if he
and Hanuman could be assigned a couple of cells. One of the
librarians told them to wait a moment, and they waited. The
librarian's bald head and gaunt, pale features gave him the
appearance of a living skull; he rubbed the back of his shiny
head and went over to the table at the centre of the alcove.
Quickly he studied a map of the library's west wing. The five
hundred and thirty-two cells of the huge novices' wing were
represented as rectangles of coloured, inlaid woods. Little
white figurines – intricately carved pieces of onyx the size of
a child's finger – occupied all the rectangles. The librarian
continued to rub at the prominent bone beneath his scalp, and
as he rubbed and pursed his lips, a new librarian appeared out
of the west wing's darkness. The new librarian entered the
alcove, checked the map, and removed two of the figurines from
the table. 'If the young novices require cells, 212 and 213 are
free,' he said.
 The first librarian took the figurines from the other
librarian's hand and put one back on the number 213 rectangle
while the other figurine he placed on number 212. He drummed
his fingers against his skull and studied Hanuman's face. Then
he turned to Danlo and asked, 'Are you
321
 both first year novices? Then you'll require a guide today,
won't you? Is it agreeable that you share a guide today?'
   During Danlo's previous visits to the library, he had never
minded such sharing, though he knew very well that Hanuman
preferred having a guide all to himself. (In truth, Hanuman
would have been happiest having no guide at all.) Hanuman never
liked sharing anyone's attentions, but all first year novices
were encouraged to visit the library in pairs, the better to
husband the library's scarce supply of librarians. This was a
relatively new rule for the novices; it had been in effect only
since 2934, during the Pilots' War when one hundred and ten
master librarians had defected from the Order to join the
Encyclopaedists of the great library on Ksandaria. In the
thirteen years since that time, the librarians of Neverness –
the better ones – had been forced whenever they could to take
novices to their cells two at a time.
'Is this agreeable to you?' the librarian repeated.
 Danlo noticed Hanuman staring at the three idle librarians
who remained on their bench. Clearly, they were keeping
themselves in reserve for those favoured high novices who
might require a private guide.
'It is agreeable,' Hanuman said at last.
'Yes,' Danlo said. 'We have come here together before.'
'Very well,' the librarian said, 'then please follow me.'
  He led Danlo and Hanuman into the west wing, up a flight of
chipped and very worn stairs, and then down branching stone
corridors almost devoid of light. The brightest object Danlo
could see was the master librarian's skull, nodding up and
down as he shuffled along. The air was warm, and it stank of
mould, moisture and thirty centuries of sweating bodies. One
by one, they passed doors of dark, rotting wood. There were
many doors. At last they came to the door of the 212th cell,
or rather, the door leading to that cell's gowning room.
  'Here we are,' the master librarian said as he opened the
door for Danlo. He walked on a dozen paces into the
322
 darkness until he came to the door of 213th cell, which he
opened and invited Hanuman to enter. Then he turned and walked
back to the auricle room built between both Danlo's and
Hanuman's cells. Before he entered it he said, 'My name is
Baran Smith. I wish you both a fruitful journey.'
 Hanuman stepped down the dank corridor, turned and bowed to
Master Baran Smith. Then he looked at Danlo and smiled. It was
a strange, nervous smile, like that of a child about to enter a
room of his parents' house that has been forbidden to him. With
a quick head bow toward Danlo, he went inside his cell and
pulled the door shut behind him.
 As Danlo had done on other days, he entered his cell's
steamy, semi-dark gowning room; he shut the door and performed
the customary ritual: he pulled off his boots, disrobed, hung
his clothes on the wall hooks, filled the hot pool with water
and bathed. The room was so tiny and cramped that, by
stretching out his arms like a bird, he could touch either
wall. When he had finished, he stood dripping water and sweat.
He faced the black cell opening at the end of the room. He
touched Ahira's feather to give himself courage. He touched the
scar above his eye. Quietly, he recited the librarians' mantra:
'Every act of knowing brings forth a world.' And then he
whispered, 'Shantih,' and stepped into the cell.
 Almost immediately the cell sealed itself behind him. The
cell was even tinier than the gowning room; it consisted of
nothing more than a low tank of water surrounded by a ceiling
and walls of deep purple neurologics. These neurologics were a
crystalline latticework of proteins, the living circuitry of
the cell's tutelary computer. The cell is a computer, Danlo
reminded himself. In a way, entering the novice's cell was like
entering into the heart of a computer or rather, like squeezing
inside the artery of a computer's brain. As he moved about the
cell he was very careful not to touch the neurologics, much as
one is
323
 careful not to touch another's eyeball. He eased himself into
the tank and lay back. The water was as warm as blood. The
water was dense and heavy with dissolved mineral salts,
hundreds of pounds of carbonates and sulphates, which increased
its buoyancy. As the room grew dark, he floated easily on the
water's surface, bobbing up and down like a piece of driftwood
on a tropical sea. Soon the tank's wavelets stilled and there
was no motion at all. The blackness encompassing him was as
total as deep space. There was neither sound, nor heat, nor
cold, nor any other sensation to stimulate his nerves. The warm
water touched every part of him except his face; it dissolved
his sense of gravity and his sense of being a discrete organism
cut off from his environment. In truth, he hadn't any feeling
for the separateness of his skin and could scarcely tell where
the membranes of his body ended and where the dark salty water
began. This dissolution of his physical self into the
computer's innards was at once soothing and profoundly
terrifying. Twelve times before he had lain thus, with his
belly trembling beneath the water, waiting for the computer to
fire his quiescent nerves with information.
 In the beginning, at the moment of creation when the energies
of eternity burst forth into time, the whole of the universe
was immanent in a single point. The universe was infinitely
hot, infinitely compact and pregnant with infinite
possibilities.
  Suddenly, inside Danlo's head, there was light. Or rather,
there was the perception of light, the shapes and textures of
shimmering images, the blues, golds and reds by which light is
known as light. As the tutelary computer – the vibrating
neurologics surrounding him – came awake to the touch of his
thoughts, it scanned his brain for chemical and electrical
events; to use the akashic's terminology, it began to 'read'
his mind. And in turn, the computer directly excited the
horizontal, bipolar, and anacrine cells inside the retinas of
his wide-open eyes. These cells began to process information,
the images and symbols flowing
 324
 out of the computer. And then other cells began to fire, the
ganglion cells whose very long axons formed the optic nerve
leading up into his brain.
 I am the eye with which the universe beholds itself and knows
itself divine – he suddenly remembered Hanuman saying this
once, just as he remembered that the eye's retinal cells are
the most efficient and highly evolved of all neurons. Indeed,
the retina is really an extension of the brain tunnelling
through the tissues and bone of the eye sockets, reaching out
to the world of light. The retina is the seeing part of the
eye, the knowing part; without the coding of light into
exquisitely timed, varying voltages, it would be impossible to
see.
  There are many ways of thinking about the evolof the
universe. Most of the Order's eschatologists teach a fusion of
the old science's strong anthropic principle and the theology
of the cybernetic religions: The universe is regarded as God,
an evolving being trying to create new information and complete
its self-organization. Historically, this is known as a
Socinian universe, a universe that is trying to wake up and
behold itself in order to attain perfection.
  Without eyes – or without the photocells and webwork of
neurons lining the back of the eyes – it would be impossible to
receive and interpret the light of the universe. And yet he
knew there were other ways of seeing. A pilot, it was said,
could interface his ship's computer even if he were as eyeless
and blind as a scryer. While Danlo floated in the warm water
and faced the cybernetic space of the tutelary computer, he
couldn't help wondering what terrors he must endure if ever he
became a pilot. Someday, he thought, he would be sealed inside
the pit of his own lightship, and it would be very like
floating in a salt water tank. Only, the ship computer would
infuse images directly into his visual cortex, directly into
the neurons at the back of his brain. Seeing is an act of will
accomplished by the brain.
325
he remembered. What would it be like to see the splendid stars
as a pilot sees, melded directly into the information flows of
a lightship's computer?
 'You'll have to wait until you become a pilot to know this,'
Master Jonath had told him some days before. Total interface
between computer and brain is too profound for a novice to
experience properly. And safely.'
 As Danlo entered into the most apprehensible of all the
cybernetic spaces – into that universe of knowledge the cetics
call 'shih space' – he wondered how any interface could be more
total. The tutelary computer read the stream of his questing,
chaotic thoughts and infused him with images, sounds and other
sensa. The computer touched his optic nerve, touched the
auditory nerve leading from his inner ear into his brain. It
touched the nerves of his nose, mouth, throat and heart, all
the nerves of his body. In this way, he saw the first spinning
galaxies form and coalesce out of creation's brilliant light;
through his skin burned the gamma and the beta and other
radiations of a hundred billion stars; he felt the hot lava
seas of Old Earth heave and flow and harden, and then fracture
suddenly, only to melt again and be reabsorbed in itself, over
and over for an aeon until vast floating continents formed,
islands of primal basalt that trembled beneath his bare feet
and vibrated up through his bones into his skull; he tasted
salt water in his mouth and listened to the long, dark roar of
the first oceans, the ageless oceans out of which had emerged
the first living things; he smelled life: it was a rich scent
of chlorophyll and blood, strong, vital and urgent; following
the marvellous smell of life as it drifted, branched out and
spread over the black soil, all across Old Earth and a million
other worlds much like Earth, he sought to understand the
evolution of the bacteria and protists, the fungi, plants,
animals and all the alien kingdoms of life. Always, life was a
reaching out into diversity and strangeness, into new forms of
organization. He felt this life all about him, and inside,
pulsing, touching, tasting, eating,
326
 dividing and redividing; he felt himself as a green-veined
leaf breathing cool, sweet carbon dioxide and cell by cell
growing outwards and up to taste the sun, and as a volvox, a
hollow sphere of cells rotating like a tiny world inside a
water droplet, and as an ancient calymene, and as a jewfish,
and as a snowworm writhing in the belly of a bird, and as a
man, and suddenly the possibilities of evolution were too many
and the sea of life's infinite sensations overwhelmed him.
 – Danlo wi Soli Ringess?
 He watched the many clades of life divide and branch out into
their ancient lineages and he was aware, dimly, of a voice
calling out to him. He slowly realized it was the voice – or
thoughts – of the master librarian. In the auricle room next to
him, on the other side of the wall of neurologics, Master Baran
Smith was monitoring his journey through shih space. (As he was
also helping Hanuman with his journey.) Because they both
shared parts of the same cybernetic space, Danlo could read
quite a few of Master Smith's thoughts.
– Danlo wi Soli Ringess?
 – Yes?
  – Please face away from sight/sound/smell for a moment.
You're too deep into simulation.
  – Like this? If I do not reach out ... with a will to see,
then the images will fade out and die, yes?
  – Use your sense of tapas to restrain yourself; you know the
way.
  Of course, after only twelve brief, initiatory journeys into
shih space, it would have been impossible for Danlo to have
mastered tapas, or the other cybernetic senses. To face and
cross the landscape of the computer's information flows, one
needs the mental disciplines which the cetics have developed
and evolved into the cybernetic senses. Although shih, the
sense that 'tastes', feels and organizes varying concentrations
of information, is the highest of these, there are others.
There is plexure and iconic vision,
327
simulation, syntaxis and tempo. Tapas is really more of a
mental discipline than a sense; indeed, it is the ability to
control – to restrain – the simulation of seeing, hearing, and
smelling. First year novices always have trouble learning
tapas, which is why a master librarian must be present to
guide their first journeys into shih space.
  – Do not depend too heavily on simulation, Young Danlo.
  – But, to see/hear/smell, to ... simulate the history of the
gods – it is more immediate to experience the field of
knowledge than to kithe it.
  – It's more immediate, but it takes much longer. And it
exhausts the mind.
  – I... did not mean to say it was merely more immediate. It
is necessary, to experience, or not ... to know – I am not
saying this clearly, am I? Or thinking it. What I mean is, it
is vital to distinguish simulation from true living, yes?
  Although it was dangerous to dwell very long in a simulated
reality, Danlo felt strangely attracted to the unreal
thoughtscapes that the computer painted with its electrons. To
experience information constructs as blue waters, or as flowing
lava rivers, or as mountains of rock and ice, to experience a
simulated world as if he were a bird soaring above shatterwood
forests, which, in their finely re-created black branches and
shimmering green-grey needles, seemed almost real – this was as
spellbinding as it was terrifying. In truth, he mistrusted and
hated computer simulation. His deepest fear was that he might
confuse unreality with reality, whatever 'reality' truly was.
Reality is truth, he thought. The truth of the universe. And
so, ironically, because he had a passion for truth, he made
himself journey through the false worlds and surrealities of
simulation as deeply as he could. He did this to test himself.
He bared his nerves to the computer's sly touch because he had
a passion to master this most basic of the cybernetic senses.
328
 As he floated in the warm water and felt the cold wind of a
computer-created landscape ice his eyes, he tried to explain
this to the master librarian. But he did not explain himself
well. The electronic telepathy of shih space was a poor way to
communicate emotions because one could not see another's face
or mannerisms, could not look deeply into another's true self.
  – You're young still, and you'll have many years to learn
simulation. But now you should face your syntactic sense and
kithe the history that you're seeking. This is most efficient
for simple information searches.
  – But what I am looking for is not simple.
  – What is it you want from today's journey, then?
  – I am not sure. There must be a purpose ... to the
evolution of gods. All evolution. The way the ecologies spring
forth from a god's ontogenesis, the sprung ecologies, like ...
the Golden Ring, a pattern and purpose.
  – This is teleological thinking, Young Novice.
  – But I... must know more about the gods. Their evolution.
Mallory Ringess, my father – he became a god, yes? I must know
why.
 Danlo knew that the Order academicians were fairly divided
over the manner in which life's evolution should be viewed.
Many of the mechanics, for instance, eschewed and reviled
teleology. Those who honoured the ancient scientific philosophy
regarded life as the result of uncountable, random chemical and
quantum events; for them, all of history was a pushing process,
the micro-events of the past determining and pushing life into
an unknown, arbitrary (and meaningless) future. While Danlo
appreciated the stark beauty of determinism and chance, he
found that this philosophy gave a distorted vision of reality
or rather, a narrow vision. This vision did not fundamentally
lie, but it was much like examining the colours of a painting
molecule by molecule in order to perceive its symmetry or the
artist's intention. There were other ways of seeing, and
teleology was one of these. For
329
Danlo, as for any good scryer or holist, the future was as real
as the present moment; when he closed his eyes or looked up
into the starry night, he saw intimations of a something
infinite and splendid pulling him into its heart. Or pulling
him with its bloody talons and beak into its belly – the wild,
atavistic part of Danlo still saw the universe as an infinitely
vast silver thallow just beginning to wake up and devour all
living things.
  – But teleology is like a lens ... that reveals history's
direction, yes?
 Master Smith's response to this question – his directed
thoughts – should have been nearly instantaneous, so Danlo was
surprised at the silence inside his head. But then he
remembered that the librarian was also guiding Hanuman's
journey, so he waited patiently for Master Smith to re-enter
the shared space of their computer.
 Danlo wi Soli Ringess? You wonder about teleology? This is
true; there are many epistemological systems you might choose,
Young Novice.
  – The Fravashi call the ability to see knowledge as through
different lenses, that is, through different epistemological
systems, to enter and hold different worldviews ... they call
this 'plexure'.
  – The Honoured Fravashi misuse the word. They've broadened
it to fit certain concepts of their philosophy.
  – But plexure is ... a splendid way of seeing, yes?
  – Properly, plexure is one of the cybernetic senses. You're
here today, Young Novice, to attend to these primary senses.
  – Such as syntaxis?
  – You'll never become a pilot unless you master it.
  – But the symbols, the word storm.
  – Is it that you have trouble visualizing the ideoplasts?
  – No, sir, it is just the opposite. I visualize them ... too
intensely. Even when I am faced away from the computer, I can
still see them. They burn in my mind.
 For many moments, Danlo held his breath as he let his
330
head fall back into the waters of the tank. He floated in
liquid darkness and silence. When his brain's throbbing need
for oxygen grew unbearable, he breached the surface, gasped for
air and tasted mineral salts in his mouth. The sound of his
deep breathing echoed off the neurologics close all around him.
He faced the computer's shih space, then, calling up his sense
of syntaxis in order to see his way through the word storm
building up inside his mind. When he closed his eyes, he saw
fields of glittering, three-dimensional symbols, the jewel-like
ideoplasts of the universal syntax. His mind's eye beheld and
kithed the ideoplast for the concept 'as', which appeared in
the form of a pentacle, or rather, a wispy, five-pointed
starfish frozen with the rigidity and crystalline perfection of
blue topaz. This connected to the double diamond bars of the
'god' ideoplast, and to others. Each ideoplast, like the
characters of the ancient Chinese script, was designed as a
unique, graphic (and beautiful) expression of the most complex
or simple of things and ideas, and there were many, many
ideoplasts. Danlo, in his study of the universal syntax, had
memorized some fifty thousand of them. The notationists say
their number is potentially infinite, and this must be so, for
reality itself may be sliced up, viewed, symbolized and
reassembled into concepts of infinitely refined nuance and
profundity. Ideoplasts are sometimes referred to as the 'words'
of the universal syntax, but in fact they can also represent
the sounds of spoken language, or ideas, or axioms,
definitions, formalizations, logics, or even entire models of
the universe.
  – Young Novice, you must kithe now, or else you'll become
lost in the word storm.
  Kithing, the decipherment and understanding of the
ideoplasts – the reading of symbols – is the most elementary
pan of syntaxis, but it is not an easily learned art. Inside
Danlo's visual field, the computer placed arrays of brilliant
mental symbols, artful orderings of the many teachings and
concepts relating to the godhead. He studied the
331
relationships between the ideoplasts; like diamonds and
emeralds set into a Fravashi tapestry, there was an implicate
pattern and meaning revealed in the way they linked together.
He kithed the ideoplasts one by one, and as a wholeness which
revealed startling juxtapositions of alien and ancient
philosophies. In kithing the almost organic correspondences
among the ideoplasts, the way in which the placement of each
one influenced the placement and meaning of any other, he saw
beautiful ideas and truths that otherwise might have been
impossible to apprehend.
  The computationists of the first cybernetic religions viewed
the universe as a computer. Every bit of material reality was
treated as a component of this universal computer. Every event
in spacetime therefore was seen to be the result of the
universe computing the consequences of nature's laws, which the
computationists called algorithms. According to the oldest
cybernetic theologies, twenty billion years ago, at the moment
of creation, the universe was programmed with these algorithms
to run until it reached its halt state and the answer to some
great question was finally decided.
 Because the arrays of ideoplasts were now forming up too
quickly for him to kithe easily, Danlo faced away from the
computer's word storm. He wanted to think alone and in silence.
All around his naked skin was blackness, warm waters and real
air heavy with salt and moisture, but inside his mind he could
still see too many of the ideoplasts. He had been born with his
mother's 'memory of pictures', a vivid, eidetic memory which
often caused him as much consternation and confusion as it did
joy. In his memory field, where the colours of each image were
as pure and clear as the silvery greenness of a shih leaf, one
ideoplast in particular stood out. This ideoplast derived from
one of the great formulae of the Upanishads, and it symbolized
the mystical equation between one's deepest self and the
supreme godhead underlying all of reality. It appeared as
332
 a tear-shaped diamond drop suspended in the centre of a sphere
of ten thousand other similar drops, each one shimmering violet
or red or deep blue, each one reflecting the light of all the
others. He could not rid his inner sight of this beautiful
ideoplast, nor could he forget the many other ideoplasts placed
in correspondence with it. Or rather, he could forget only with
utmost difficulty. He had to use a trick of the remembrancers,
to conjure up in his mind a vast snowfield onto which he
dropped the ideoplasts, one by one, until they had all vanished
through layers of fluffy white soreesh snow. Only then could he
efface his memory. Only then could he find the quiet place
where his thoughts ran deeper than the flow of mere symbols or
words.
  – The reality behind all things, the deep reality that some
say is unknowable, and ineffable ... if there is a deeper
reality, a will beneath the reality of natural laws, snow and
ice, the blessed natural world, how could I ever know what it
is?
 For many moments of real time, the objective time that the
horologes sometimes call out-time, Danlo floated in his tank
pondering the cybernetic theologies. He decided that if the
universe really were an infinite computer, then it would be
impossible ever to know deep reality, for the same reason that
the information flows of a simple computer could never 'know'
the architect who had designed and written the programs. There
was no way for a human being or any other part of the universe
to get outside that universe, to see reality (or the 'God' who
had created that reality) as it really was. Because he craved
knowledge of the true nature of God, he decided to learn
everything he could about this strange cybernetic theology
which had influenced so many peoples across the Milky Way
galaxy and so much of man's history.
  – Nikolos Daru Ede, the first Architect of the Cybernetic
Universal Church, was ... the first god. The first human being
to become a god, if he was a god, or is, still, then
333
 where is his freedom ... to be and become, since he is still,
like everything else within our universe, a being of matter
and energy programmed by the god outside ... by the real God's
universal algorithm, yes?
  Again, he faced the tutelary computer, letting the stream of
his turbulent, half-formed thoughts flow freely. He waited a
long time for the master librarian's voice to speak inside his
inner ear.
 – Do you understand this question, Master Smith?
   He waited and waited, but the tutelary computer had fallen
into silence.
  – Master Smith, I do not mean to interrupt but ... is
Hanuman all right? He is looking for something that he should
not, yes? He sometimes becomes too absorbed ... in the
possibilities of computers.
   Danlo waited in his hot pool of water, and still there was
only silence and darkness. After he had waited almost longer
than he could bear, he became aware of Master Smith's chiding
thoughts.
  – Danlo wi Soli Ringess, you must not ask about your friend
or his journey. On pain of your forbiddance to the library, you
must not ask this.
   Librarians, Danlo suddenly recalled, on pain of banishment
from the Order (or sometimes even death) may not reveal
anything to anyone about journeys that they have guided.
   – I am sorry, sir, but when you did not answer my question
...
   – To get a precise answer to your questions, Young Novice,
it's best to form your questions precisely. Don't the
grammarians teach that the whole art of the universal syntax is
in precisely asking the right questions?
 Danlo agreed that this was so, and he began thinking
precisely in order to pose his questions. In the cybernetic
visual space, which was as clear as a blue sky and seemed to
open in all directions just behind his eyes, he conjured up
various ideoplasts. One by one, their intricate, crystal-
334
line shapes appeared as out of nothingness. He stacked the
ideoplasts together into an array. Or, to use the precise
terminology of the cetics, he pleached the ideoplasts, weaving
together ideas and ancient paradoxes, much as a Fravashi Father
weaves golden threads into a tapestry. To 'pleach' is the verb
form of the art and sense known as plexure; literally, it means
'to weave together simplex thoughts in order to reveal complex
truths'. Deep in plexure, with care and precision, he applied
the rules of the universal syntax to pleach the ideoplasts into
a unique question-array. For the hundredth time since beginning
his novitiate, he marvelled at the power and beauty of the
universal syntax. He began to see it as a profound language
that he might use to ask questions, not only of the tutelary
computer, but of the universe itself. The syntax rules, he
knew, derived from the logic and relationships of natural
language; as language encoded concepts into words, the
universal syntax was an organic language symbolizing and
interrelating the knowledge of all the arts, particularly the
art of mathematics. In fact, mathematics could be regarded as a
highly abstract, formal language which was merely a part of the
universal syntax. Or – and this, he had learned, was one of the
many disagreements dividing the cantors and the grammarians –
it was possible to argue that the universal syntax was really
just a branch on the infinite tree of mathematics. In both
arts, ideoplasts were pleached into arrays, whether to make
discoveries about natural law, or to create beautiful new
philosophies, or elegant mathematical theorems – for Danlo,
what did it matter which art contained which, so long as he
mastered plexure and learned to speak the secret language of
the universe?
  – It is hard to formalize ... concepts about gods or God,
yes? About the universe? There is always the problem of
self-reference. Russell's paradox, the paradoxes.
   – Danlo? Young Novice, can you understand me? Please face
away from your sense of plexure, for a moment.
 – Like this? Shall I face into telepathy?
335
  – That's good.
  – It is hard for a human being ... for me, to think about
God.
  – But you have indeed formalized this difficulty, haven't
you?
  – Do you mean the expression: 'By none but a god shall a god
be worshipped?'
  – That is correct. The expression is implicate in your
question-array. Did you know that you have rediscovered a
saying of the ancient Sanskrit: Nadero devam arcayer?
  – No, I did not know that, sir.
  – And your formalization of the scholastics' attempted
reconciliation of human free will and God's providence is as
precise as it could be.
  – Thank you.
  – However, your relating this reconciliation with the modern
cybernetic Doctrine of the Halting is not precise. The
correspondences are weak and unsupported by historical fact.
  – But, haven't I shown that ... there is no universal
algorithm for deciding whether or not a computer will reach its
halt state?
  – Your proof of this is elegant, Young Novice. Perhaps even
brilliant. However, you've only re-established what was known
millennia ago.
  – But if God, the cyberneticists' conception of a god, or a
first cause, outside this universe, if this god programmed the
universe to get an answer ... to some almost impossible
question, then there is no way to know what this answer will
be. If there is an answer, or solution, it would be impossible
to know it without letting the universe-as-computer run until
it has reached its halt state and ...
  – Please continue.
  – And therefore Ede-as-God ... could not really be God, or
could not be proclaimed as becoming God, since the future ...
since the universe is creating the future moment by moment in
the only way it can be created. Or known.
336
 There is no way to foresee Ede's destiny. Or the destiny of
anyone. And therefore the reconciliation of free will and
determinism must ... have a correspondence with the Doctrine of
the Halting.
  – Of course, that is so. But you'll never find the correct
correspondences unless you kithe the history of the Cybernetic
Universal Church.
 – And which part of this history shall I kithe?
 – That is for you to discover, Young Novice.
 – But I ...
  – You must kithe now, Young Danlo. Please excuse me while
you kithe.
  This time, when Danlo returned to the word storm, he kithed
the arrays of ideoplasts more quickly and with a clearer mental
vision. He struggled to illuminate the sometimes dark and
subtle relationship between the Cybernetic Universal Church's
doctrines and the history of the Civilized Worlds. Information
appeared before him in arrays of ideoplasts, and then in arrays
of arrays. Concerning Nikolos Daru Ede and the founding of the
Church there was more information than he ever had imagined,
glittering, vast, frozen seas of information. Information is
not know, he told himself. And knowledge is not wisdom. Even
though he knew this saying of the librarians was certainly
true, in the word storm building inside him he found both
knowledge and wisdom aplenty. The work and wisdom of five
hundred generations of the best human (and Fravashi) minds was
crystallized into the ideoplasts; as he kithed discoveries,
facts and concepts tested and re-tested over the millennia, he
felt himself touching these minds. He called into play the most
generalized of the cybernetic senses, his sense of shih. Shih
was the aesthetics of knowledge, or more precisely, the
relationship between wisdom and knowledge. In many ways, shih
was both a sense and a sensibility, the sense of realness,
beauty and truth which guided him among the mountains and
flowing glaciers of information. This information was built up
of many layers
337
linked together, interconnected and crosslinked in subtle ways.
There was a fractal intricate quality to this information;
kithing it was almost like following the icy points of a
snowflake as they divided and redivided out from its dazzling
centre. It was possible to view the information arrays as
beautiful wholes which synthesized the conclusions of various
philosophical systems, or to examine the meaning of each frozen
point, or the many branching sub-points: crystallized knowledge
within crystals within yet smaller crystals. Each layer was
structured with the same complexity as the next layer, lower or
higher. Delving deeply through the information layers for a
specific fact and then reascending quickly to perceive certain
historical trends and patterns left him dizzy in his mind.
Without shih to help him appreciate the elegance of these
patterns and facts – and to help him choose which pathways
through the richly textured knowledge were worth pursuing and
which were not – the arrays of ideoplasts would soon have
overwhelmed him.
  According to the Doctrine of the Halting, the universe will
reach its halt state when and only when Ede-as-God has absorbed
and become co-extensive with that universe. Those who believe
that it is impossible to foreknow the universe's halt state
must also believe that Ede is not destined to become God, that
he must face the same evolutionary pressures as any other
organism or god. These unbelievers are said to be guilty of the
Evolution Heresy.
 For many moments of computer time, Danlo learned about the
religion known as Edeism. Here is a part of what he learned:
that almost three thousand years ago, on the planet of Alumit,
there had lived a simple computer architect named Nikolos Daru
Ede. That is, Ede was simple in the sense that the whole of his
life was given over to a single idea: it was his dream to make
computers that would illuminate, vasten and preserve human
consciousness. In other ways Ede was a complex man, at once a
master
338
architect and a rebel against all architect ethics, a
pragmatist and a mystic, a plagiarist of ancient writings and
an author capable of creating such brilliant literature as
Man's Journey and Universals. Above all, he was both a man of
acts and a dreamer, and toward the end of his long, turbulent
life (it is a matter of historical fact that he lived 213
years) he succeeded where all other architects of his time had
failed. He designed and created a computer, a work of art and
genius which he called his eternal computer. And more, he
discovered a way to copy and preserve human consciousness into
this computer, supposedly without disfiguring that
consciousness. And then, while he was still keen of mind and
healthy in his body, he defied the Third Law of Civilization.
He – this is what his followers have believed and preached for
three millennia – this extraordinary, visionary, defiant man
bade his journeymen architects farewell and carked his
consciousness into his computer. The process of scanning and
downloading the information in his brain destroyed it; a few
faithless scoffers said that Ede had merely found an ingenious
way toward suicide, but most others testified that the memories
and algorithms comprising his very essence had been exactly
duplicated in his eternal computer. Ede had been vastened, they
said, made into something much vaster than a mere man. From
this singular, tremendous event, the religion of Edeism sprang
forth almost overnight. Ede's faithful student, the architect
Kostos Olorun, proclaimed that the ancient prophecies and the
purpose of man's evolution had at last been fulfilled: Man had
created God, or rather, had downloaded his essence into a
computer destined to become as one with the universal godhead.
Over the next few years, Ede's eternal computer – Ede himself,
as God – rapidly continued his ontogenesis toward the infinite.
Many times, Ede copied and recopied his expanding consciousness
into a succession of larger and more sophisticated computers
which he himself designed and assembled, and then into whole
arrays of robots and
 339
computers of various functions. (Where Ede-as-man had been a
master of computational origami, Ede the God perfected this
art of interconnecting and 'folding' together many computer
units so that they functioned as an integrated whole.) One
day, it came time for Ede to leave Alumit and go out into the
universe. He ascended to heaven, into the deep space above the
planet that could no longer be his home. Using his power as a
god, with the help of tiny, self-replicating robots the size
of a bacterium, he disassembled asteroids, comets and other
heavenly debris into their elements; he used these elements to
fabricate new circuitry and neurologics. He feasted on the
elements of material reality, and he grew. According to the
Doctrine of the Halting, which Kostos Olorun hastily
formulated to prevent other architects from following his
path, Ede the God was destined to grow until he had absorbed
the entire universe.
  And so Ede faced the universe, and he was vastened, and he
saw that the face of God was his own. Then the would-be-gods,
who are the hakra devils of the darkest depths of space, from
the farthest reaches of time, saw what Ede had done, and they
were jealous.
 Danlo, floating in his tank and faced into the dark tapestry
of the tutelary computer's neurologics, began thinking of the
details of his father's own ontogenesis. Mallory Ringess, he
remembered, had never wholly abandoned his human flesh; he had
begun his journey into godhood in a very different way than had
Ede. But as the Fravashi say, all paths lead toward the same
place.
  And they turned their eyes godward in jealousy and lust for
the infinite lights, but in their countenances God read hubris,
and he struck them blind. For here is the oldest of teachings,
here is wisdom: No god is there but God; God is one, and there
can only be one God.
There could only be one god, and, as Danlo learned, in
340
the Cybernetic Universal Church that formed around the creed of
Edeism, there could be only a single architect – or Architect –
blessed with the power to talk with him. Kostos Olorun, a vain
and cunning man possessed of great energy, was the first of
these Architects; he named himself 'God's Architect' because
Ede himself had supposedly entrusted him with his eternal
computer, the very one into which he had first carked his godly
soul. As God's Architect, Kostos Olorun was guardian of this
holy computer, and more, it was said that only he of all Worthy
Architects could interface it; only he could read out Ede's
instructions to mankind or receive the new revelations commonly
known as 'algorithms'. This supreme vanity of Olorun's became
reified in the Doctrine of Singularity: that henceforth and for
all time, Ede's power over man would be embodied in the
singular person of God's Architect. Over the next fifteen
hundred years, there were sixty-three of these God's
Architects. Many of them were gifted individuals who led an
expansion of the Church unequalled in zeal since the rise of
Islam or Holism on Old Earth. And so Edeism spread across the
galaxy, riding the crest of the Swarming's third wave. It might
well have become the universal religion of humanity, but in the
year 1536 since Ede's vastening, a schism almost ruined the
Church. The Elder Architect, Olaf Harsha, who was guided by a
heartfelt (and heretical) ambition to directly face and speak
with Ede the God, led a majority of Architects to rebel against
the Doctrine of Singularity. Thus began the War of the Faces,
which grew to be the greatest war ever fought by human beings
and lasted for over two hundred years.
  The atrocities committed by Architects against Architects
became more numerous and savage as the war continued. With
victory almost certain, the Elders of the Reformed Church
inevitably turned this war inward and began a purge of their
own members, those millions of Architects suspected of various
heresies or impure thoughts toward the
341
Church. It was at this time that the Cleansing Ceremony became
a weapon used to disfigure the brains of anyone who dared to
think of dissent. There is evidence that a few Elders even
hired warrior-poets to assassinate their enemies. Almost
certainly, the rule of the warrior-poets to kill all hakras
sprang from a secret pact made between the warrior-poets and
the Elders of the Church.
  As Danlo learned about the War of the Faces, he squirmed and
shifted in his tank. The water suddenly felt too hot, too thick
with dissolved mineral salts. He remembered too well what
Hanuman had said to him in the shih grove the afternoon before
Pedar's death. For an Architect to voice a desire to be more
than a mere man was the worst of sins, and so the Elders of
Hanuman's church would certainly have regarded him as both
heretic and hakra, that is, if they had ever been able to read
his innermost thoughts. In another age, the warrior-poets might
have pursued him across the stars and slain him. Danlo was very
glad that they lived in gentler times, though he could never
understand the attitude of his friends who believed that such
wars were now unthinkable. His father, after all, had led
pilots to war against their fellow pilots, and if this kind of
tragedy could occur within the Order, then anything was
possible. He thought about his father for a long time as he
brooded over the nature of war within the universe.
  – A man becomes a god ... and then there is war, yes? An
ecology of organized murder. Who knows what ecologies will
spring forth from my father's apotheosis?
  – It would be foolish to blame Nikolos Daru Ede for the War
of the Faces, Young Novice. Or to blame Mallory Ringess for the
problems our Order now faces. The Ringess was the greatest
human being our Order has ever produced, and it is not upon us
to judge him or blame him.
  Danlo, alone inside his cell, separated from the librarian
by a wall of purple neurologics and a lifetime of different
342
experiences, couldn't help smiling at Master Smith's admiration
of his father. Since entering the Order, he had found that
there were two types of academicians: those who reviled the
Ringess name and those who practically worshipped his father as
a god. Clearly, Master Smith belonged to this second category.
  – I do not want to blame anyone. I just need to see ... the
interconnectedness between act and actuality. Like a spider's
web, the way everyone's fates are spun together. The web of
halla. Or shaida: pull any strand, and the entire web quivers.
When my father became a god he pulled at this web, and I think
the universe has yet to stop its quivering.
 This thought gave birth to other thoughts that competed to
occupy Danlo's mind. One thought, as dark and ominous as a
death cloud rolling across the sea, soon blocked out all the
others: in his kithing the history of the War of the Faces, he
had perhaps overlooked something vital to his life and the
lives of everyone he had known. He interfaced the word storm,
then, looking for this elusive fact or idea. As a snowy owl
scans an icefield for a hare's bounding white form, he used his
sense of shih to single out a particular event occurring near
the end of the War of the Faces: a scarce one hundred years
after the Architects of the Reformed Churches had defeated what
they called the 'Old Church', their missionaries first reached
Yarkona, and a terrible plague spread wildly across the
Civilized Worlds.
  The lower estimates place the numbers killed at billion
people. On some planets, such as Yarkona and Simoom, the death
rate was as high as 96%. Because the plague struck down whole
populations simultaneously, many died of neglect rather than
from the outright effects of the plague virus. With no one to
care for the victims or replace the fluids which ran from their
bodies, the immediate cause of death was often dehydration.
343
 Even though Danlo was enwombed in water, he could now feel
himself sweating, salt water bursting from his pores and
merging with the dark waters all around him. Ever since coming
to Neverness, he had known that civilized people blamed certain
diseases on the worms, protozoa, bacteria and viruses that swam
through each person's tissues and blood. Privately, deep in the
cavern of his most secret thoughts, he had both evaded and
ridiculed this notion; he had supposed that the civilized dread
of disease was nothing more than a wild fear of the life living
inside everyone. Now he was not so sure. When he wondered how a
simple virus could kill a full man many billion times its own
size, the computer engaged his sense of simulation with a
sudden flood of images. He 'saw' a single plague virus tumbling
among the salt ions, water molecules, amino acids, lipids and
sugars suffusing a neuron cluster of a living brain. The virus
was a splendid, symmetrical, terrible thing, a tiny jewel of
protein encasing dark coils of DNA. It floated among the
intricate, branching neurons and finally attached itself to one
of them. It fit into the neuron's membrane as a knife-blade
slides into a sheath. There the virus DNA passed deep into the
neuron's centre, into the nucleus of human DNA evolved for
billions of years from the simplest of elements.
 It is known that the Architects of the Old Church, with the
help of the warrior-poets, designed the plague virus from a
common retro-virus. After immunizing themselves, they used this
bio-weapon against the schismatic Architects. But the virus
proved unstable and, by chance, it mutated into a radical DNA
structure infecting all Architects and all human beings
indiscriminately.
  Although the structure of the plague DNA was truly new, the
retro-virus from which it had been wrought was older than
mankind. Human retro-viruses, he discovered, were essentially
little pieces of ancient DNA broken off from human chromosomes
and trying to return home. In
344

 the neurons of a human brain (or especially in liver or sex
cells) the plague DNA found a perfect home; possessing the same
chemical 'memory' as did a retro-virus, it stitched itself into
a neuron's DNA, masquerading as human DNA, hiding. Sometimes it
might hide for many years before taking over the neuron's own
chemical machinery to reproduce itself. And then something
astonishing and terrible would happen. As Danlo watched the
computer-generated simulation inside his mind, he saw the
infected neuron swell with new life until it burst, and
thousands of newly made viruses swarmed into the brain's
tissues. These viruses infected new neurons, which died the
same way, in turn infecting others, again and again in a chain
of explosive reproduction until whole segments of the brain had
been killed. The death and rupturing of millions of neurons
inevitably caused the brain sac to fill up with fluids until it
crushed against the inside of the skull.
  The plague sufferer, within one day following the breakout
of the disease, manifested the following afflictions: fever,
vomiting, diarrhoea, accompanied with the hallmark 'lightning
bolt' headache. Then came convulsions, lockjaw, bleeding from
the ears and inevitably –
 – No!
  The computer placed a picture in Danlo's visual field, a
many-hued simulation of an Architect man dying of the plague.
But Danlo had no need to view the plague's terrible colours:
the white foam that frothed from pale lips; the crusts of
red-black blood; the blackened eye hollows, and the eyes
themselves, grey as lead, lightless in death. He suddenly knew
that he had seen death from the plague before. Shaida is the
death that takes a whole people to the other of day, he
thought. Haidar and Chandra and Wemilo and eighty-five others
of the Devaki tribe had died of the great plague – of this he
was suddenly certain. How they had died of an ancient and
extinct virus, though, he had no idea.
345
  The plague virus is not extinct. By the end of the War of
the Faces, it had infected virtually all human beings of the
Civilized Worlds. The survivors carried the virus within their
chromosomes and passed it to their descendants. The virus has
become embroidered within the human genome as a passive, if
parasitical, segment of DNA. Suppressor genes inhibit the virus
DNA, in most people keeping it quiescent and inactive. Only in
those few societies isolated from history's convulsions are
there to be found human beings possessing little or no
inheritance of these suppressor genes. Such human beings are
susceptible to contact with and infection by –
'No!'
 In an instant of electrified muscles, frothing water and
breath exploding hot and hurtful from his lips, Danlo rose up
in his tank. The submerged tiles were hard and slippery against
his feet; dark waves of displaced water churned and slapped
against his belly. Because he had broken interface with the
tutelary computer, he could see nothing at all, neither with
his mind nor with his eyes, which burned with liquid salts and
ached every time his heart beat. 'No!' he cried out again, a
angry sound born deep in his throat. The sound filled the
blackness of the cell all around him. It struck the living,
inner walls of the computer, echoed for a moment, then died. In
the dank air, the cloying, protein smell of the neurologics
mingled with the acridness of his sweat. 'Shaida is the man who
kills other men,' he whispered.
 But no one heard him recite this line from the Devaki Song of
Life. The tutelary computers of the library are sensitive to
the subtlest of human thoughts, but when one is faced away and
speaks only the language of voiced words, the sound waves fall
off neurologics which are as deaf as stone.
'Father, Father, what have you done?'
But no one answered him; the only sound was his breath
346
streaming through his throat and water tumbling off his naked
body into the warm pool below him.
 'Master Smith!' he said aloud. 'You say that we should not
blame my father. But... he led an expedition to the Devaki
people!'
 He realized, then, that no matter how loud he shouted,
neither Master Smith nor anyone else could hear him. The walls
of neurologics were perfect insulators of sound, and the
interior of a tutelary computer could be the quietest place in
the universe. Because he wished to bring Master Smith to a
keener appreciation of the tragedies (and crimes) of the life
of Mallory Ringess, he sank back down into the waters of his
tank, and he reached out with his mind. He interfaced the
tutelary computer, immediately engaging his sense of electronic
telepathy.
  – Master Smith? You admire my father because he sought the
secret of the universe. He thought the Elder Eddas ... were
coded into the Alaloi DNA. The highest gods carked this secret
into the oldest DNA, yes? My father thought that the Alaloi DNA
was different from that of civilized peoples. Splendid and
blessed, in this way.'
 He waited for Master Smith to respond, but the telepathic
space that they shared was as quiet as still water. He supposed
that Master Smith must be guiding Hanuman's search, or perhaps
he was angry at Danlo for having broken interface so suddenly
moments before. Many times, Danlo had been warned against the
dangers of too abruptly breaking interface.
  – Therefore my father journeyed to the Alaloi. To the
blessed Devaki. And their DNA was different. It ... is. They
lived on Kweitkel for five thousand years – the War of the
Faces never touched them, the plague. O blessed God! They were
so innocent, so untouched, so rare.
 He waited for Master Smith to defend the actions of Mallory
Ringess, to deny that Mallory Ringess should have known that
the Alaloi peoples bear no immunity to the plague. He waited
for Master Smith to condemn Mallory
347
 Ringess for the crime of carelessness in not realizing that
he – and all civilized humans – were carriers of a murderous
plague.
 – My father was a murderer!
   His father, he knew, had once lain with the women of the
Devaki. He had shared his seed with them. It was murder to
knowingly infect others with such shaida DNA. His father must
have known that someday – whether in fourteen years or in
fourteen generations – the virus infecting the Devaki would
come to life, and that would be the end of the Devaki.
  – My father must have known this, yes? But he did not care.
Why should a god care if he murders men or women?
   Why should a god care if he murdered many tribes of people?
Danlo remembered that Haidar and others of his tribe, when he
was younger, every winter when the sea froze, had visited the
Olorun, Sanura and Patwin tribes of the Alaloi. And over the
years, the men of these tribes most certainly had visited many
other tribes far west of Kweitkel. The plague virus had
murdered the Devaki, and even as he floated in his tank and
wondered why Master Smith would not answer him, the virus was
secretly murdering his cousins of the Patwin tribe. Soon,
someday, perhaps after next deep winter, if he did nothing to
restore the halla nature of the world, the virus would murder
all two hundred and twelve tribes of the Alaloi, and his people
would be no more.
  – A man lusts to become a god ... and then there is murder.
Murder upon murder upon murder. Why is the world of men nothing
but murder?
   After a long while of waiting for Master Smith to answer
him, Danlo began to worry. It occurred to him that the reason
for Master Smith's silence was that Hanuman's journey was not
going well. Perhaps, he thought, Hanuman had become lost in the
word storm and could not find his way out of shin space.
Perhaps he was so absorbed
348
in cybernetic samadhi or one of the other states of computer
consciousness that he had no will to return to himself. Or
perhaps Hanuman had tried to penetrate the library's secret
pools of information only to be struck senseless by the
computer's guardian programs. It had happened to other novices
before. Perhaps Hanuman lay in his tank, eyes closed and mind
dead, breathing warm, heavy, salt water.
 – Master Smith, please! Is Hanuman all right?
 Master Smith had told Danlo that he should not inquire about
the journeys of other novices, but now he was too worried to
mind such prohibitions. He should have waited patiently in his
cell, then. He should have delved back into the computer's
lovely information flows and waited for the touch of Master
Smith's thoughts, but he had no desire for more information. He
might have lain back and floated in his tank, waiting for hours
or moments or days, waiting endlessly as Haidar and
Three-Fingered Soli and the other men of the Devaki tribe had
once taught him to wait. After a long time of waiting, however,
he began to smell something faint and far-off; although he
could not quite identify this smell, muddied as it was with the
rankness of the neurologics and salt water, it disturbed him.
The smell was almost fruity, and it had a sharp, effervescent
quality that penetrated his nostrils deep into his brain. This
ominous smell set loose a flood of emotions and memories, and
he was suddenly afraid.
 Hanuman has not been the same since Pedar died, he thought.
Oh, Hanu, Hanu, why haven't you been yourself?
  When Danlo could bear waiting no longer, he fairly leaped
out of his tank and rushed out of the cell as it opened before
him. He passed into the gowning room where he worked his
clothes and boots over his wet skin. He opened the door to the
corridor beyond. Steam billowed out into the corridor, and
suddenly the smell that had worried him was much stronger than
before. He knew that he should recognize this smell. He should
dread and loathe
349
 it as the smell of death, though it bothered him that he
could not remember why.
Death upon death upon death.
  As quickly as he could, he ran down the corridor until he
reached the door to the librarian's auricle room. With his
knuckles he knocked on this dark, rotten door. 'Excuse me,
please, Master Smith – can you tell me if Hanuman is all
right?'
 He waited a moment, then knocked again, pounding and pounding
against the door with his fist until he realized that Master
Smith would not answer him. Up and down the dimly lit corridor,
the sound of him hammering away at the shatterwood door
reverberated from bare wall stones. But the auricle rooms and
cells themselves were built to damp all exterior sounds, and no
matter how desperate his pounding or shouting, neither Master
Smith nor any other librarian or novice would ever hear him.
 Kana oil is the smell of death, he suddenly remembered. The
warrior-poets wear kana oil perfumes.
  With this dreadful thought, he cast aside all rules and
etiquette, and he pulled the door open. Now the smell of kana
oil was thick and intense. It rushed like electricity into his
brain, and his throat clutched up, and he gasped for breath. In
the auricle room, there was another smell, too, rich and quick
and running with life. As a child, he had smelled this
thrilling smell many times before. It was the smell of blood –
the smell of death. On a small white futon at the rear of the
auricle room, Master Baran Smith sat politely with his hands
folded across his lap. Danlo had almost expected to see him
floating in a pool of water, but then he remembered that the
master librarians do not need such aids in order to interface
the tutelary computers. Master Smith, he saw, was fairly
floating in a pool of blood. The floor of the cell glistened
with blood, and the futon was no longer white but now almost
pure red. There were drops of bright blood sprayed against the
auricle room's neurologics, and blood dripping down the curves
of Master
350
 Smith's shiny bald head. It had been four years since Danlo
had seen so much blood, when Haidar had speared a shag-shay ewe
against the clean new snow and used his knife to cut her
throat. Danlo stepped closer to Master Smith, the better to see
more clearly. Master Smith was not really sitting at all, but
rather slumped back against the wall neurologics. His eyes were
open and his face was twisted in surprise as if someone had
caught him in deep interface unable to see or hear or move.
Someone must have opened the door unbidden, even as Danlo had;
he must have rushed upon Master Smith and cut open his throat.
Murder upon murder upon murder.
  Although it seemed that room's redness and the reek of kana
oil would go on and on forever, all this seeing and smelling
and remembering of Danlo's lasted only a moment. When he saw
that Master Smith was dead beyond hope, he turned and ran from
the room.
Warrior-poets murder because they love to murder.
 Toward the door of Hanuman's cell he ran, and he moved so
quickly that his wet queue of hair whipped about violently,
flinging drops of water into the air. He wanted to tell Hanuman
that the ontogenesis of man into god was dangerous beyond
belief and fraught with shaida. He wanted to tell Hanuman other
things, too, and he was very afraid that there would never
again be time for such telling. There was a warrior-poet loose
in the library – of this he was sure. He was sure, too, that
the warrior-poet had killed the librarian only as a preliminary
and that his masters had really sent him to murder Hanuman.
351




CHAPTER ELEVEN
The Moment of the Possible

How do I prepare for death? Learn how to live. How do I
learn to live? Prepare for death.
 – saying of the warrior-poets

When Danlo entered Hanuman's cell, he found it empty. Much
water had been splashed out of the cell's tank; this water had
overflowed into the cell's gowning room and now lay gathered in
shallow puddles across the uneven floor tiles. Hanuman's
clothes – his kamelaika, undersilks and furs – still hung from
the wall hooks. His boots were neatly stowed on the rack
beneath them. Danlo quickly looked about for blood-sign, but he
saw nothing to indicate that Hanuman was dead or dying. Only
the strong and terrible smell of kana oil pointed toward the
warrior-poet as the cause of the cell's emptiness.
  The warrior-poets are like spiders – they like to take and
bind victims before killing them.
 In truth, the warrior-poets liked to torture their victims,
and Danlo thought about this as he tore from the cell and
turned into the corridor. He might have gone for help then. He
might have turned toward the right and passed back through the
corridor the way that he had come, into the soft lights and
safeness of the library's main hallway. He might have scrambled
frantically to find a librarian or anyone else, to give the
alarm and cry out that Master Smith had been murdered by a
warrior-poet. He might have
352
given way to panic (or prudence) but he began remembering many
things about the warrior-poets, and so when he stepped out into
the corridor, he turned toward his left. Me turned into the
darkness of the long corridor. He rushed deeper into the
library, and the smell of kana oil grew denser and sickening,
like that of wolverine musk sprayed into the air. The corridor
was empty, nothing but moist wall stones and the numbered doors
of the novices' cells. As he ran further into the corridor, the
numbers grew higher. There were many doors and many novices
enwombed safely within their cells, lying blindly and deafly as
bodies in a prayer ship. They would not know that a
warrior-poet had recently passed their way; they would never
suspect that one of their fellow novices was soon to be
murdered.
Hanu, Hanu.
  Somewhere in this almost endless corridor, beneath one of
the flame globes that had burned out years ago, he came across
a black cloak flung against the floorstones. He picked it up
and smelled it; the coarse wool reeked of kana oil. Sewn to the
inside of this noxious garment were rows of little leather
pockets. In each pocket, there was a feathered dart no bigger
than his finger. At random, he slipped one of these darts free
of its pocket. He held the dart up to the faint light diffusing
down the corridor. The tip of the dart was a steel needle
enamelled with some dark, hard substance as red as dried blood.
He pulled other darts free. Each dart was tipped with a
different coloured poison, chocolate or puce or violet. The
warrior-poets, it was said, carried many drugs and poisons to
play tunes of agony upon the human body as a musician does a
gosharp.
Oh, Hanu, Hanu.
  Almost without thinking, Danlo grabbed up a handful of darts
and continued his wild dash down the corridor. Soon he saw a
faint light ahead of him where the corridor ended and a
little-used stairwell led to the library's other floors. He
drew closer to the stairwell, his boots pounded
353
 against the floorstones and he gasped at quick lungfuls of
air. There were two people in the stairwell, as he could now
plainly see. One of them, bound fast to the stair's heavy
railing, was Hanuman li Tosh. And the other was a warrior-poet
wearing a beautiful rainbow kamelaika. He had the beautiful and
dangerous look of a tiger, and he held a long, killing knife
against Hanuman's pale throat.
  'Please don't come any closer,' the warrior-poet said, and
his voice spilled out like honey into the corridor.
  Something in this marvellous voice compelled Danlo to obey
and so, some twenty yards from the stairwell, he stopped. He
stood frozen with indecision, trying to get back his breath.
 'No, Danlo – the drug, the pain, you mustn't!' This came from
Hanuman who was pulling and thrashing against his bonds. Many
circles of glittering kasja fibre wound over his arms and chest
and looped around two balustrades of the iron railing behind
him. Each movement must have caused him considerable pain, for
the kasja fibres cut at his skin, which was raw and bloody
below his shoulders and along the curve of his lower ribs. The
warrior-poets, Danlo remembered, sometimes refer to the kasja
fibres as acid wire because the touch of these protein
filaments against the flesh is like acid opening up a wound.
'No, Danlo – no!'
 Beneath the acid wire imprisoning him, Hanuman was naked. The
warrior-poet must have pulled him from his tank and forced him
at knife point to walk through the corridor. And Hanuman must
have fought fiercely with all the skill of his killing art: the
warrior-poet's neck was scratched and bleeding as if Hanuman
had tried to claw open the arteries of his throat. Clearly, he
had succeeded in yanking off the warrior-poet's cloak, but this
had hardly impeded the poet, for he must have caught Hanuman in
a headlock or some other hold and dragged him into the
stairwell. And Hanuman was still fighting, only now he warred
against himself, against his urge to scream and
354

whimper and plead for Danlo to somehow help him.
'No, Danlo, please!'
 Even though the light in the empty stairwell was quite
strong, it was hard for Danlo to tell if the moisture beading
up on Hanuman's face was water remaining from his cell's tank
or sweat. In truth, Hanuman's face glistened, and it shone with
light, and with fear, with hatred and with other deep emotions
impossible to guess at. His eyes were wide open as he stared up
at the warrior-poet; his eyes never left the warrior-poet's
eyes, except once, when he peered out into the corridor to look
at Danlo.
'Please, go away! Run, Danlo, run!'
 'Yes,' the warrior-poet said, 'please run away. Go and fetch
the librarians or their robots. By the time you do, I'll be
done with Hanuman.'
'Danlo, please, no!'
  Still standing close to Hanuman, the warrior-poet smiled
politely and bowed. He pointed his knife at Danlo, saying, 'You
must be Danlo wi Soli Ringess. The son of the Ringess whom
everyone is talking about. I had thought you would remain in
your cell a little longer, but meeting you is an honour, under
any circumstances. I'm Marek of Qallar. I've come to Neverness
to meet you and your friend.'
  Danlo looked into the stairwell, at the long flight of worn
basalt steps that led to the higher floors above Hanuman and
the warrior-poet. A part of him hoped that a group of
librarians or perhaps journeymen pilots might at any moment
appear upon these stairs and swarm the warrior-poet. Another
part of him, however, whispered that no number of men or women
or robots would be quick enough to save Hanuman before the
warrior-poet plunged the knife into his throat. Most likely
nothing could save Hanuman now, and therefore Danlo should flee
back down the corridor lest the warrior-poet take his life,
too.
  'If you wish to remain,' Marek said to Danlo, 'you've only
to wait a moment or so. I've already asked Hanuman his poem.'
355
  The warrior-poets, Danlo recalled, sometimes honoured their
victims by reciting part of a poem. If their victims could
supply the last lines and complete the poem, they were set
free. If they could not, then ...
 'Alas, your friend is no student of poetry,' Marek said. 'And
so now it's time I gave him the drug.'
  So saying, with blinding speed, the warrior-poet removed a
silver needle-dart from a pocket of his kamelaika and stabbed
it into the side of Hanuman's neck. Instantly, Hanuman
screamed out and began writhing inside his cocoon of acid
wire. Instantly, too, Danlo began to move toward the
stairwell, but the warrior-poet held out his knife and shook
his head.
  'Please don't move,' Marek said. He kissed the yellow ring
that encircled the little finger of his left hand, and then he
kissed the violet ring on his right hand. He grasped Hanuman's
head between his hands, leaned over, and gently kissed his
forehead. 'The drug won't kill him. It will only bring him to
the moment of the possible.'
 Again, Hanuman screamed, a high, hideous sound like that of a
sleekit caught in a snow tiger's claws. Danlo ached to jump
forward and help him but he could not move. It was as if he
himself had been caught and immobilized by one of the
warrior-poet's paralytic drugs. Danlo watched as Hanuman's face
twisted in anguish. Then Hanuman bit his tongue, and his
muscles jumped beneath his sweat-streaked skin as if touched
with an electric current. His eyes were rigid and locked open
as he cried out, 'No, the light – no, no!' The warrior-poet,
Danlo thought, must have inoculated him with ekkana, a drug
that rendered the body responsive to the faintest of sensa. For
Hanuman, the photons of the flame globes above him would be
like drops of molten gold poured through the dark opening at
the centre of the eye. The neurons of his retina would sizzle
and hiss at the searing touch of light. The ekkana, in its
excitation of the nervous system, was like an acid that
dissolved the myelin coating of every nerve, leaving
 356
each nerve fibre open to the world's cruel kiss, and to the
interior electro-chemical storms and metabolic signals that
rage through the body. Soon, in moments, Hanuman's entire
universe would be a blazing tapestry of nerves, these endless
filaments of fire that branch off and fray into ever tinier
fibres, winding like acid wire through every organ and tissue,
touching every cell and imprisoning the flesh inside the
terrible pain of its own being. And yet, astonishingly,
paradoxically, this torture was meant to free Hanuman from
himself. The waking brain acts as an eyelid to consciousness;
its function is to shut out the blinding shimmer of all things,
inside and out, lest one lose sight of the everyday world of
needs and dangers and fears. But the ekkana drug – one of the
more elegant trans-psychedelics – opens the eyes. It opens the
brain to light reflected from all possible surfaces, from rocks
and wind-torn leaves and the frozen sea, from broken souls and
from nightmares and from corpses spread out upon fields of
snow. To stand naked and wide-eyed before this blazing light is
to open oneself to all the pain in the universe. Then comes the
moment of infinite vulnerability. This is the moment of the
possible, when one feels the pain of all things reflected and
magnified inside oneself and accepts it utterly, without fear.
In this moment before death, beyond death – in the pain beyond
pain – there is an utter awakening to the fact that one is
infinitely more than one's own body and self. In this one,
soaring, marvellous moment, if one is strong enough to drink in
the terrible fire of life, all things become possible.
 'Danlo, please!'
  If one is strong enough to overcome oneself – this is what
the warrior-poets believe – then there is a golden moment as
eternal as the heaven of the Kristian sects or that ineffable
state that the Architects call cybernetic samadhi. But if one
is weak or fearful or damaged in the soul, then there is only
hell.
 'Please – the warrior-poet!'
357
 Again, Hanuman turned his head in Danlo's direction, but it
was as if he were looking into a wall of flames. Hanuman shook
his head back and forth as if blinded; he ground his teeth and
cursed and cried out to Danlo.
 And all the while Danlo stood in the gloomy corridor amidst
the smells of steam, neurologics, mildew, kana oil and sweat.
He looked back and forth between Hanuman and the warrior-poet,
and he did not know what to do.
 'Let him go!' Danlo finally said. 'No one can bear this kind
of pain!'
  The warrior-poet brought his killing knife up to his lips
and kissed it. 'We shall see,' he said.
'Not ... Hanuman.'
 'Your friend is stronger than you could know. Can you read
faces, Danlo wi Soli Ringess? Look at him – he's almost ready
for the knife!'
 Danlo gripped the warrior-poet's darts in his hand as he
stared at Hanuman's face. All he could see there was agony,
terror and death.
  'Please let him go,' Danlo said. Soon, perhaps after Danlo's
racing heartbeat ten more times, the warrior-poet would push
the point of his killing knife through the centre of Hanuman's
eye. He would push it back and back, slowly twisting the knife
up the optic nerve into the brain. In this way, he would try to
bring Hanuman to his greatest agony, and thus to his greatest
possibility for freedom.
 'The ekkana drug,' Danlo said. There must be ... an antidote.
Please give him the antidote.'
  The warrior-poet smiled at Danlo and said, 'You must know
there is no antidote. And even if I were to free your friend,
traces of the holy drug would always remain in his body. The
ekkana never completely metabolizes. Even after many years – or
lifetimes.'
  'Let him go, then. So that he will have the rest of his life
... to come to his moment of the possible.'
 The warrior-poet smiled at this, a wide and lovely smile that
spoke of his approval of Danlo's mindfulness in the
358
 face of death – even if that death was to be Hanuman's and not
his own. 'You know things about us warrior-poets,' he said.
'Some ... things.'
 'Then you must know that we've been well paid for the life of
Hanuman li Tosh. For his life – do you understand?'
  'Whatever you have been paid, we will pay you more. I, we
... the Order.'
 'And what would you pay for your friend's life, Young Danlo?'
  'A ... billion City disks.' Danlo, who had never even seen a
City disk, much less appreciated its value, named the first
figure that came to him.
 'A billion City disks? Do you have such a sum? Does your
entire Order?'
  'A million, then,' Danlo said. 'A hundred – we will pay
whatever must be paid.'
 'That's a generous offer,' the warrior-poet said with a
smile. 'But I'm afraid it's too late for Hanuman's life to be
bought with money.'
'But someone has paid you!'
 'Of course,' the warrior-poet said. He used his knife to
point at Hanuman's rigid, eye-locked face. 'And this is the
payment.'
 'The Architects! On Catava, the Architects of Hanuman's
church – they solicited his murder, yes? Because they consider
him a blasphemer. A ... hakra.'
 'In truth, they have only excoriated him as a potential god.'
'But not ... condemned him?'
'Not for that reason.'
'For what reason, then?'
 The warrior-poet laughed softly. 'For someone who is himself
close to his moment, you ask many questions.'
'I ask you ... not to kill him.'
'Others have asked that too.'
'Who?'
359
  'His mother, of course. She wanted him brought back to
Catava to be cleansed of the worst of his programs. But his
uncles pleaded for a more final fate.'
  Danlo closed his eyes for a moment and shook his head. Then
he took a step toward the warrior-poet. 'Let him go,' he said.
'Please let him go.'
  'One moment, please, if you will.' The warrior-poet touched
Hanuman's forehead then looked into his eyes. 'In a moment
he'll be free.'
  At this, Hanuman suddenly shouted, 'No!' He banged his head
back into the railing behind him with such force that the
stairwell rang with the sound of humming iron. 'Please, Danlo,
the warrior-poet – kill him!'
'Hanu, Hanu!'
'Kill him, now! Kill him, kill him!'
 Danlo stared at the warrior-poet as he held a fistful of
darts down by his side. The warrior-poets were the ancient
enemies of his Order. The warrior-poets had once made the virus
that killed his found-father and his mother and all the Devaki
people. And this warrior-poet, Marek of Qallar, with his long,
shimmering needle of a knife, was about to kill Hanuman, too.
 'Be careful of the darts,' the warrior-poet said. 'Careful
you don't prick yourself.'
  Moving with mindfulness and great care, Danlo took four of
the darts into his left hand. Between the fingers of his right
hand he grasped the red-tipped dart.
 'The green dart gives one unconsciousness for an hour or so,'
the warrior-poet said. 'And the one that looks like it has been
dipped in chocolate – this robs one of the power of speech,
forever.'
 Danlo drew his arm back behind his head, sighting on the
warrior-poet's throat.
 'The blue dart carries a truth drug.'
  With a rising of his belly, Danlo began to take in a breath
of air, the way he once did before spearing a snow tiger or
casting a stone at a hare.
 360
 'The dart that you hold in your hand kills instantly – it
paralyzes the nerves of the heart. It's a quick death, Young
Danlo, but truly ignoble.'
  As Danlo stared at the place on the warrior-poet's throat
where the great brain artery pulsed along the windpipe, he
wondered if he could kill him. Once, two years ago, at nearly
twice the distance, he had cast his spear and precisely pierced
the heart place behind the shoulder of a charging silk belly
boar. But warrior-poets were not animals; it was said that they
had mastered the art of slow-time, that lightning state of the
bodymind where the firing of one's nerves accelerates so that
time slows down and each event of the exterior universe seems
to occur more slowly. No matter how precisely or quickly Danlo
cast his dart, for the warrior-poet it would appear almost as a
feather floating in the air, or if he were very adept, as a
furfly falling through a jar of honey. Most likely he would
snatch the dart from the air and cast it back at Danlo. And
even supposing this were a day for miracles and Danlo could
possibly kill him, he didn't know how he could kill him. The
warrior-poet seemed so happy holding his knife above Hanuman's
eye; he seemed fearless and fey and utterly alive.
 'Please, throw it now!' Hanuman screamed. 'Don't be afraid –
kill me now! Kill me, kill me!'
  Of course, Danlo's cast might miss the warrior-poet
altogether and strike Hanuman, and this was reason enough for
not throwing the dart. But there were deeper reasons for not
killing the warrior-poet. There was the smile upon his lips and
the calmness spread over him like a magic cloak and the
impossible awareness lighting up his eyes.
 The eyes are the windows of the universe, Danlo remembered.
 In truth, the warrior-poet had impossible eyes, a violet so
deep and dark they were almost blue-black, the colour of his
own. They were a predator's eyes, eyes that would
361
feed on the faces and fears of other men. As Danlo lost himself
in these marvellous eyes, he could not decide whether the
warrior-poet was mad or utterly sane. In a way, of course, he
was completely mad because his death-loving doctrines were a
complete unbalancing of life. Certainly he was shaida in his
madness, but so wilfully and utterly shaida that he almost made
this concept into something beautiful. Danlo thought that he
had rarely seen anyone so beautiful, and never anyone so alive.
The muscles of the warrior-poet's neck and naked forearms were
like writhing snakes; his hair was a halo of black curls, and
his skin was like living gold. He is like an angel death, Danlo
thought. The warrior-poet's face and form radiated a terrible
beauty as if he belonged to a higher order of being where
terror and beauty smiled at each other and joined hands. And
yet despite his joy of living so intense a death-in-life, there
was something about him infinitely tragic and sad. The
warrior-poet – like every child of the highly bred races – was
one of evolution's myriad experiments and pathways that had
attained a kind of perfection but would go no further.
 He is almost a human being, Danlo thought. A true human
being.
  The warrior-poet looked down at the gleaming steel that he
held above Hanuman's eye, and Danlo saw that the distance
between a man such as the warrior-poet and one who was truly
human was as narrow as the edge of a knife. As narrow, yes, yet
as great as the distance from Neverness to the edge of the
universe.
 He is a murderer of men. Shaida is the way of the man who
kills other men.
 The infinite pain that the warrior-poets worshipped was like
a whirlpool that sucked them down into the dark froth of
madness and murder. The warrior-poets were the supreme
murderers of mankind. They liked to think of themselves as
bonsai masters using their terrible knives to prune dangerous
or diseased individuals like so many twigs
362
  – all so that the greater tree of life might remain vital
and strong. They were supreme in this art of bringing death.
The universe, they believed, would always require such agents
of death.
 But I am not a murderer, Danlo thought. His arm, which he
held back behind his head, trembled to release the dart. I am
not he.
  Although Danlo had a strange sympathy for madness, he could
not countenance the need to murder, especially not in himself.
His way, he thought, must always be the opposite of murder. He
must be a bringer of life, even though his ideals and actions
cost him his own blessed life.
 Never kitting or hurting another, it is better to die oneself
than kill
  And this was the deepest reason of all why he could not kill
the warrior-poet: because killing led to wanton killing and
unbalanced all of life, and was thus shaida; because such
killing was a negation and saying 'no' to life's infinite
possibilities; because killing one such as the warrior-poet
eliminated the possibility that he might be healed of his
madness and thus be transformed into something truly
wonderful.
 'Warrior-Poet!' Danlo finally shouted. He relaxed the fingers
of his left hand and let the darts drop to the floor. Then he
turned, whipped his right arm forward, and threw the
red-tipped dart so that it sailed through the air of the
corridor and ticked into the door of the 264th cell. 'Let
Hanuman go!'
  At the sound of Danlo's voice, Hanuman shook his head. 'No,
please kill me. Danlo, please.'
  'I'm sorry, Young Danlo,' the warrior-poet said. His eyes
were violet streaks of light reflected from the polished blade
of his knife. 'But the moment must always come.'
'Then take me in his place,' Danlo said.
'No, no!'
'Take me, and I will live his moment.'
The warrior-poet, who had begun lowering the knife
363
toward Hanuman's eye, suddenly froze. 'What are you saying? Do
you know what you ask?'
  Danlo knew very well what he was asking. He remembered a
tradition of the warrior-poets: that if someone such as himself
offered to take another's place in seeking the moment of the
possible, the warrior-poet who held the killing knife must
consider his request.
'Take me,' Danlo repeated. 'Not Hanuman.'
 The warrior-poet stared at Danlo, then bowed his head in
respect for Danlo's obvious love for his friend. 'Your offer is
noble,' he said. 'But nobility is not enough.'
  Danlo stood with his hands open toward the warrior-poet. He
saw that the warrior-poet was reading the curve of his lips,
searching in his face and eyes for some crucial thing.
'Your offer is brave, too, but bravery is not enough.'
  Danlo let his face fall free and open, like that of a
sleeping child. He remembered, then, that the warrior-poets
only rarely honoured such requests.
'Are you so ready to die, then?' the warrior-poet asked.
 For a long moment, Danlo stared at the warrior-poet's killing
knife, and he did not know if he was ready to die. Certainly he
had no wish to die, nor was he sure if this was the right time
to die. In truth, death beneath the warrior-poet's knife, even
though an excruciating possibility, was far from inevitable.
Even if the warrior-poet should allow him to take Hanuman's
place, there would be no instant execution. First, with acid
wire or some drug, the warrior-poet would immobilize him. And
then he would ask Danlo his poem. If Danlo could complete this
poem, the warrior-poet must set him free.
  'Even the readiness to die is not enough,' the warrior-poet
said. 'Not quite enough.'
 All this time the warrior-poet had been staring out into the
corridor, and he was staring still, and his eyes never stopped
searching Danlo's eyes for that rare quality of being he hoped
to find there.
364
  'I must ask your friend if he is willing for you to take his
place,' the warrior-poet said. He looked down at Hanuman and
asked, 'Is this agreeable to you?'
 'No!' Hanuman screamed. He lunged against the wire binding
him, and he spat blood at the warrior-poet. And then there was
a moment of quiet as his body fell still and he looked at
Danlo. He looked at him for a long time (or perhaps it was only
a moment) and then, to the warrior-poet he said, 'No, I won't
agree – kill me if you must, not him.'
  The warrior-poet nodded his head gravely. He turned to Danlo
and said, 'He does not agree that you should take his place. He
has said "no", so shouldn't we abide by his wish?'
'No! – he does not know what he wishes or wants!'
  'Of course, if he had let you take his place, I would have
had to kill him instantly, to repay such cowardice.'
  'And so you ask a question that leads to this ... paradox?'
'We warrior-poets love paradox.'
'But why ask him anything if you intend to kill him?'
'I didn't say I intend to kill him.'
'But– '
 'He has given us his answer, made his wishes known. Now it's
upon us to decide what to do.'
'Let him go, and you may ask me your poem.'
 'I would like to recite a poem for you,' the warrior-poet
said. 'But are you ready to hear it?'
  'Yes,' Danlo said. But as soon as this word pushed apart his
lips and flew out into the air, he was afraid that the
warrior-poet would refuse to say his poem. For a moment, he
regretted throwing away the darts. He hated waiting helplessly
for the warrior-poet to decide his and Hanuman's fate. And then
he remembered something that Old Father had once said about the
nature of ahimsa. Ahimsa, according to the Fravashi, need not
be merely a passive refusal to harm other things. For some
people, sometime,
365
 there was a rare power to ahimsa, and this power came from the
will to affirm all other life as identical to one's own. The
will to affirm death: if he asserted no preference for his life
above that of others, then he would never defend his life at
the cost of another's death. And therefore, in the violent and
bloody universe into which he had been born, he must soon die.
Today, tomorrow, a moment hence – he would cast his life away
as if it were an uneaten bloodfruit, still ripe and sweet with
juice. When his time came, he would make this affirmation
forcefully and fiercely, as he would have thrown the dart at
the warrior-poet. But until then he would live freely, without
fear.
 The power of ahimsa is not just the readiness to die, he
thought. It is the willingness to live. To live utterly without
fear – this is a fearsome thing.
  'Yes,' Danlo said again, 'I am ready ... to hear your poem,'
he took a step toward the warrior-poet, and then another. The
warrior-poet's knife shifted slightly, and Danlo saw streaks of
blue-black light, the fearsome reflection of his own face. The
warrior-poet moved the knife slowly away from Hanuman's eye. He
looked at Danlo. He smiled, slowly, knowingly. Danlo took
another step forward, and his foot seemed to hang in the air
forever. Now the smell of kana oil was overpowering. It brought
to him the memory of his passage into manhood when he had lain
beneath the stars and learned to go beyond pain and death. It
brought to him, too, an awareness of the warrior-poet's
childhood. He could see this timeless time as streaks of violet
lighting up the warrior-poet's eyes. In the golden glow of the
warrior-poet's face, he could see the little child who sensed
the terribly unconscious closeness of death. It was the whole
of the warrior-poet's art to bring this deep knowledge into
full consciousness. The warrior-poet smiled at Danlo, and he
touched his lips to his violet ring, and as he accomplished
these movements against the heavy pull of space and time, he
sent waves of air molecules flowing out into the corridor.
Danlo's nostrils
366

were open to this air, open to the smell of kana oil that
pierced his nerves and stabbed into his brain. He stepped
closer to the warrior-poet, and he could not take his eyes off
the warrior-poet's knife. Soon, perhaps, if he failed to
complete the poem, the knife would stab through his eye into
his brain. In a blindingly quick moment of time, his life would
be done. Done, yes, but not destroyed. He could never cast his
life away in the sense of wasting it, for life could never be
unmade or destroyed. When the sharp, cold knife broke through
the bone at the back of his eye, his blood would flow out of
him like a river. It would spray over the wall stones and the
steps and the iron railing; it would redden the warrior-poet's
black hair and touch his beautiful eyes with the sting of iron
and salt; it would fall over Hanuman's face like drops of
morning light, and when Hanuman opened his mouth to scream his
final 'no!' it would touch Hanuman's tongue and flow down his
throat, into his belly, into the onstreaming life and tissues
of his body. His blood would flow as endless and deep as an
ocean, touching everything, nourishing everything, making
everything more alive. He would live in everything, forever,
just as the wild smell of kana oil and the marvellous colours
of the warrior-poet's robe and Hanuman's beautiful, broken soul
lived now and forever in him.
 'Come here!' the warrior-poet said to Danlo. He was smiling
at him, looking at him in gladness as if he had found a younger
brother who has been lost. 'It is enough – you are ready to
hear the poem, I think.'
  With ten quick steps, Danlo rushed into the stairwell. He
came over and stood next to Hanuman. He touched Hanuman's
bloody hand and his glistening forehead. He touched the cool
strands of acid wire encircling him. He looked at the
warrior-poet, who was standing so close that he could have
touched him, too. 'Please cut him free,' Danlo said. 'You have
agreed to ask me the poem – so please free him.'
The warrior-poet stepped so close to Danlo that it
367
seemed he was drowning in the smell of kana oil. The
warrior-poet lightly ran the tip of his knife down the cocoon
of acid wire over Hanuman's chest; this made a metallic,
zippering sound, but the acid wire remained whole and
unmarked. The kasja fibres are hard to cut,' the warrior-poet
said. 'And even if I could cut him loose, I would not. If I
did, he would try to kill me. Or kill himself.'
 Hanuman was shaking, now, his whole body shivering with rage
and pain. His pale eyes were locked open, and they fixed on
Danlo. It was hard for Danlo to tell if Hanuman could
understand what was being said.
  'But if I ... fail to answer the poem,' Danlo said, 'then
you will free him, yes?'
 'In a way,' the warrior-poet said. 'I have a drug that will
make him sleep – he'll wake up in three days, and he'll remain
alive, if he wants to.'
'Then give him this drug.'
  'Not yet. He must be awake to witness the moment of the one
who takes his place.'
'But– '
 'If you answer the poem, you may give him this drug. There is
the purple needle-dart that you dropped in the corridor, do you
remember?'
  'I remember,' Danlo said. Then he nodded to the warrior, and
told him, 'Please ask me the poem now.'
  The warrior-poet examined the tone of Hanuman's eyes, and he
said, 'It is too bad. Your friend has passed his moment. Now we
shall never know what might have been possible – for him.'
'Ask me the poem – before it is too late.'
 The warrior-poet nodded his head and reached into the side
pocket of his kamelaika. He removed a needle tipped in pink.
'Please stand with your back to the railing, next to your
friend.'
 Danlo moved over next to Hanuman so that they stood side by
side. He felt the hardness of the iron railing press against
his spine. Behind him, below him, the stairs dis-
368
appeared into the lower levels of the library. In the depths of
the stairwell, he heard the dark, underground sounds of hissing
steam and water gurgling through unseen pipes. 'You will not
bind me with ... the acid wire?'
 'No,' the warrior-poet said. He stood in front of Danlo, eye
to eye. Danlo felt the warrior-poet's breath fall over his
face; it smelled sweet, like oranges and honey. 'I've no more
wire.'
'Then why not let me stand free, without drugs?'
  In his left hand, the warrior-poet held his paralytic needle
near the side of Danlo's neck; in his right hand, he gripped
the killing knife. 'If I recite the poem and you fail to
complete it, you might wish to run away.'
'I will not ... run away.'
 'You might wish to struggle, to avoid the ekkana drug.' The
warrior-poet looked at Hanuman and bowed his head. 'You've seen
how the ekkana licks the soul with tongues of fire.'
 'Truly, I have seen this,' Danlo said. 'But is it not
possible ... for one to reach the moment of the possible
without the ekkana?'
  The warrior-poet turned to study Danlo's face for a long
time, and then he smiled. 'Perhaps it is possible,' he said.
'We shall see.'
  Danlo felt Hanuman's shoulder pressing against him. He
 reached down by his side where he found Hanuman's hand all hot
 and slippery with blood. He held Hanuman's hand tightly, and he
 said, Tell me your poem, then.'
   Now the warrior-poet moved in close to Danlo so that their
 chests almost touched; he pressed the needle against Danlo's
 throat and held the killing knife above Danlo's eye. 'Do you
 like poetry, Young Danlo? Do you know many poems?'
   At this question, Hanuman came to life. He screamed and then
 laughed hideously; his hand squeezed Danlo's twice in secret
 code as if to remind him of all the nights that Danlo had spent
 memorizing Pedar's ancient poetry.
 369
   'I know ... some poems,' Danlo said. He neglected to mention
 that during the last half year, he had memorized some twelve
 thousand poems.
    'Few people care about poetry any more,' the warrior-poet
 said. 'But once a time, poetry was the soul of civilization.'
   'My ... father liked poetry,' Danlo told him, not knowing
 what to say.
   'This is known. The Ringess once said that poems are the
 dreams of the universe crystallized in words.'
    'And the poets ... are the part of the universe that
 dreams?'
    'True,' the warrior-poet said. Though sadly, the dreams
 often destroy the dreamer. The price of perfect words paid with
 broken lives.'
    Despite the extreme peril of his situation, Danlo smiled. He
 thought that the greatest paradox of the warrior-poets was that
 they used poems as well as knives in trying to reach the moment
 of the possible.
   'I shall now recite the first four lines of a poem,' the
 warrior-poet said. 'An old, old poem – are you ready to hear
 this poem, Danlo wi Soli Ringess?'
    Danlo felt Hanuman's fingers suddenly clasp his hand as if
 he were struggling to hold onto a rock on the face of a cliff.
 'Yes,' Danlo said. 'Say your poem, then.'
    The warrior-poet nodded again. His lips were only inches
 from Danlo's face, and in a clear, strong voice he said:
 'Sweet infancy!
O heavenly fire! O sacred light!
 How fair and bright!
 How great am I...'
    Danlo, upon hearing these sixteen perfect words, looked off
 into the flame globes that filled the stairwell with such a
 beautiful light. This dazzling light fell over the
 warrior-poet's face and touched every stone and streak of
 mortar
 370
  with colours of cobalt, lavender, and rose. Because everything
 he could see was so beautiful and perfect with light, he
 touched eyes with the warrior-poet and began to smile, 'bid you
 hear me, Young Danlo? I shall say the poem again – listen to
 the words:
 'Sweet infancy!
O heavenly fire! O sacred light!
 How fair and bright!
 How great am I...'
    The words that the warrior-poet spoke were like a lovely,
 golden music in Danlo's ear. He did not need to listen to these
 words a second time. His memory of the poems he had learned by
 heart was complete. He had known instantly, upon the first line
 of the warrior-poet's first recitation, that the poem was
 unknown to him.
    'What is the last line?' the warrior-poet asked. He pushed
 the point of his knife a half inch closer to Danlo's eye. 'Do
 you know the words?'
   Danlo felt Hanuman's hard little hand trembling in his own,
 and he turned to look at him.
 'Say it, Danlo,' Hanuman forced out. 'Say it now.'
  Hanuman's face, too, he saw, was very beautiful, and it shone
 with all the colours of hope. Hanuman was sure he must know
 this poem. At that moment, Hanuman was sure that Danlo must
 have known every poem in the universe.
 'Please say it!'
  Danlo tightened his grip on Hanuman's hand and drew in a
 long, deep breath. And then he said:
 'Sweet infancy!
O heavenly fire! O sacred light!
 How fair and bright!
 How great am I...'
 371
   With a shake of his head, Danlo's voice faded off to
 infinity. He had hoped that he was wrong, that somewhere in his
 memory, like a diamond hidden among mountains of lesser jewels,
 he might find this poem. He had hoped that one perfect word
 might lead to another, and thus in saying the poem's beginning
 he might remember the last line. But how could he remember what
 he had never known?
   'I shall say the poem a third time,' the warrior-poet told
 him. The third recitation must be the last. If you can't
 complete the poem, you must prepare yourself for your moment.
 'Sweet infancy!
O heavenly fire! O sacred light!
 How fair and bright!
 How great am I...'
 'Well, Danlo wi Soli Ringess?'
    Down by his side, Danlo felt Hanuman's long fingernails
 cutting into the palm of his hand. Little drops of blood ran
 from the gap between their hands, and it was impossible to tell
 whether this blood was Hanuman's or his own.
 'Danlo, Danlo.'
    He heard Hanuman whispering his name, and he saw that
 Hanuman's eyes were moist with the madness of pain.
 'Please,' Hanuman whispered.
  The warrior-poet was very close to Danlo; Danlo was very
aware of the smell of kana oil and the warrior-poet's
bittersweet breath. Danlo's whole world, at that moment, was
composed of Hanuman's deep-throated moans, the sound of his own
deep breathing, the silvery glint of needle and knife. His mind
was empty of words, as empty as the blackness between the
stars. There was nothing in his mind. And yet there was
everything. There was light from the flame globes, brilliant
streams of light reflected from polished basalt in lovely
polarized waves. There was some-
372
thing wild and strange about light. It was as if the million
million photons carried memories of distant stars and other
times. He knew that somehow everything must be coded into
light: hopes and words and the universe's deepest dreams. With
this thought, the curtain of light falling over him (and over
Hanuman and the warrior-poet, too) was torn away to reveal
something impossible to look at, impossible to turn away from.
There was a light beyond light, behind and beneath light. This
extraordinary light was made of a thousand strange new colours
almost impossible to behold. And in each colour there was a
whole world of space and memory and time. A whole world. He
sensed that just behind his eyes, spinning in the depths of his
blood, there were worlds inside worlds. There was a deepness, a
strangeness about himself that astonished him. There was
something strange about his memory, as if there was more inside
him than he had ever known. He should have remembered himself.
There was something utterly crucial to his life (and perhaps to
the lives of others) that he should have remembered. Now, and
every moment of his life, like a child standing by the ocean's
shore, he was always on the threshold of remembering, but
always this great memory eluded him. He was haunted by a sense
of missing time, a terrible suspicion that he had forgotten
great segments of his life. And most terrible of all was the
certainty that these memories lay just beneath the surface of
his soul, waiting, onstreaming, like the shimmering ocean
beneath a layer of ice and snow.
I have forgotten what I have forgotten.
 In the strange light of the stairwell, the warrior-poet
looked at him, and a terrible smile touched his lips. He
touched the blade of his killing knife with his beautiful
finger. And then suddenly, like an iceberg rising up out of a
starlit sea, a word appeared in Danlo's mind. Almost instantly
there were other words, six splendid, perfect words. The words
were strange but somehow completely familiar to him, as if long
ago he had composed them
373
himself. Or rather, as if he were composing them now in
completion of a poem, as if these six simple words were the
only words that had ever been or could ever be.
Whom the whole world....
  'Danlo wi Soli Ringess!' the warrior-poet whispered. 'Are
you ready for your moment?'
  Danlo inclined his head slightly, but before the
  warrior-poet could touch him with the knife, he fixed the
  poet's eyes and said:
  'Sweet infancy!
O heavenly fire! O sacred light!
  How fair and bright! How great am I,
  Whom the whole world doth magnify.'
    'Yes!' Hanuman cried out as he crushed Danlo's hand in his
  hand. 'Yes – the poem, the poem!'
    Through the count of five heartbeats, Danlo watched the
  warrior-poet's eyes fall through the colours of astonishment,
  elation, awe, and dread. There was an immense sadness about him
  as he lifted the needle away from Danlo's neck and lowered his
  knife. He told Danlo, 'You have said the poem perfectly. By the
  rules of my order, in a moment, you will be free to go.'
    The warrior-poet stepped backward a few paces, all the while
  regarding both Hanuman and Danlo. He looked down at their
  bloody hands locked together. He slipped the needle back into
  his pocket, but he kept his hold on the knife. From the
  corridor behind him came the faint creaking of doors and
  muffled voices; he paid no attention to these sounds, instead
  concentrating on the strangled words that Hanuman was
  struggling to say:
   'Why ... should ... he ... free ... us?'
  'Because I must,' the warrior-poet said.
   'But ... you ... contracted ... to ... kill ... me!'
  'We did, and so you might suppose most people would
  374
   be reluctant to make contracts with us poets for this reason.
  But the truth is, it has been a long time since we allowed a
  friend to take a friend's place. A long time. The last time was
  212 years ago, at the temple on Jacaranda, before the Valerian
  Gates. And of the few who have asked to seek the moment of the
  possible, in all the time of my order, not one has ever
  completed the poem – until today.'
   The warrior-poet looked long and deep at Danlo, who should
  have been exultant (and mystified) at his completion of the
  poem. But now Hanuman was coughing against his pain, coughing
  and struggling to breathe.
    'May I retrieve the dart?' Danlo asked. 'So that he can ...
  sleep?'
    'In a moment,' the warrior-poet said. There is still one
  more thing that Hanuman must witness, if we are to obey the
  ancient forms.'
  'What ... thing?'
   A harsh smile split the warrior-poet's face. 'A life has been
  paid for – haven't I told you this earlier?'
    'Yes,' Danlo said, confused. 'Hanuman's uncles have paid you
  to put a knife into his brain.'
    'No, that is not true. You misunderstand the nature of our
  contract. His uncles wanted Hanuman safely killed, from a
  distance. With poisons or viruses. An inexpensive death, an
  ignoble death without honour.'
  'I still do not understand.'
 'We've been searching for Hanuman this past year. We
suspected that he had journeyed to Neverness, and then our
informants confirmed this. They told us that the harijan were
outraged over the death of the boy called Pedar. The names of
Danlo wi Soli Ringess and Hanuman li Tosh were associated with
this death.'
  'And so the harijan also contracted to have Hanuman ...
murdered?'
  'Of course not. Warrior-poets would not accept contracts
from harijan. Our only contract was with the Architects.'
375
  'Then– '
 'When we learned of Hanuman's involvement with Pedar's death,
we saw that there might be cause to alter the contract. And so
I was sent to Neverness.'
'But Hanuman had nothing to do with Pedar's death!'
 At this, the warrior-poet pointed his knife at Hanuman and
shook his head. 'In truth, I suspected from the first that he
had everything to do with Pedar's unfortunate fall.'
  'No! – what are you saying?' Danlo held Hanuman's hand
tightly and turned to look at him. But, for the moment,
Hanuman's face was pale and empty, and his gaze was turned
inward upon his own pain.
  'I suspected that Hanuman killed Pedar, but of course I
couldn't know until I saw his face. And that is the first
reason why I bribed that ugly librarian to let me enter this
ugly building. So that I could get close enough to Hanuman to
read his face.'
'But Hanuman ... could not have killed Pedar!'
  'But he did kill him,' the warrior-poet said. 'He murdered
him. Look at your friend's face! He hears our words, he
understands. Have you learned anything of the cetics' art? The
way each face always tells the truth? Read the tells, Young
Danlo. No, not just the mouth, the way he bites his lip. Look
at his eyes, the pattern of the pupils, dilating, then
narrowing at each utterance of the word "murder". He murdered
Pedar. Probably with some drug that made him slip on the
stairs. He murdered Pedar to save your life. He murdered out of
love for you. He had the will to murder in a noble cause – this
I suspected when I interviewed the harijan elders. This I
discovered when I bound him with acid wire and asked him if he
had the courage to be a murderer. With his eyes he said, "yes"!
A rare and noble being, this Hanuman li Tosh. And therefore
worthy of a rare and noble death. The true death – it's a pity
that he may never live his moment of the possible, once you've
set him free.'
'Hanuman is not a murderer!' Danlo shouted. 'You are
376
the murderer! You, with your contracts and your needles – your
murdering knife!'
  The warrior-poet did not dispute the last of Danlo's
accusations, but only looked down at the long knife that he
held lightly between his fingers.
'My contract,' he said softly.
  At that moment, from behind the warrior-poet, the sound of
voices floated through the corridor and into the stairwell. The
warrior-poet turned, momentarily looking back over his
shoulder. Danlo followed his gaze, looking into the darkness
past the rows of cells to see a bald librarian and a
white-robed novice walking their way. The librarian was an old
man who moved in fits and jerks; his head was tilted close to
the novice as if they had just finished a journey through shih
space but the librarian still thought it seemly to monitor the
novice's conversation. Something – perhaps it was Hanuman's
moaning – caused the librarian to stop abruptly and jerk his
head erect. He looked through the steam and the uneven light
into the stairwell directly ahead of him. At the sight of a
warrior-poet brandishing his killing knife, he clapped his
hands to his face and cried out, 'Oh, no!' Then he grabbed the
novice's arm, turned, and ran in the opposite direction toward
the main body of the library. The sound of their footsteps
echoed through the corridor for a moment, and then died.
  'Now the librarians or their robots will come,' the
warrior-poet said to Danlo. 'I haven't very long to fulfil my
contract.'
'What do you mean?' Danlo quickly asked.
 'A life has been paid for. The next few moments won't satisfy
the Architects, but a contract is a contract.'
  So saying, he stood with his feet slightly apart and stared
straight ahead at Danlo. Then he turned the point of his knife
toward his own face and smiled to himself.
 'No ... do not!' Danlo said.
  He started to move toward the warrior-poet, but then the
warrior-poet plucked a violet killing needle from his
377
 robe and said, 'Please don't come any closer. Only one life
has been paid for today, not two. Your moment may come sooner
than you know.'
'My moment?'
  In the warrior-poet's left hand, he kept the needle pointed
at Danlo; in his right, he aimed the knife toward the centre of
his beautiful eye. 'I've said that the first reason I entered
the library today was to behold your friend's glorious face.
This is true. But there was another reason – we poets always
love multiple missions. After I was through with Hanuman, I
would have come for you next, Danlo wi Soli Ringess. Not to
kill, at least not this time. To see. To see for myself who you
really are. Because there is a new rule for us warrior-poets, a
new rule that is old: We must find and kill all potential gods.
Your father brought us to this, did you know? Your father,
Mallory Ringess, the Ringess – I was sent to Neverness to
determine if you were the son of the father.'
 In truth, in that moment of blood and beauty and terror,
Danlo did not quite know who he really was. He was a stranger
to himself, and his life was a mystery as deep and inexplicable
as his sudden memory of the poem.
 'His father ...' Hanuman began, but he could not finish his
sentence. His hand wrenched at Danlo's, and his face twisted,
and it was almost possible to see the waves of agony ripping
through his body.
  Never taking his eyes from Danlo, the warrior-poet said,
'For you, there is a possibility. You will be who you will be.
You will choose, Danlo wi Soli Ringess. Someday, you must
choose. And when you do, we poets will be waiting.'
  From the main body of the library, down the dark, dingy
corridor past tens of sound-proofed cells, there came the
faintest murmur of voices, rolling metal wheels and many
footsteps.
  'It's time,' the warrior-poet said. For the count of three
of Danlo's heartbeats, the warrior-poet looked at his knife.
His entire awareness seemed to narrow and become one
378
with this glittering, murderous weapon. 'It's strange. I've
lived my whole life for this moment. But now that it's come, I
find I'm not ready to die.'
'Then ... do not die,' Danlo said. 'Live.'
  Everything about Danlo – his love of ahimsa, his marvellous
will, his deep, vivid eyes – was urging the warrior-poet into
life. But there is an identity of opposites, and irony is the
law of the universe. As Danlo stared at the warrior-poet, a
sense of kinship and a terrible joy passed between them. At
last the warrior-poet smiled at Danlo and said, Thank you – now
I'm ready.'
'But I did not want– '
  'This is my last poem,' the warrior-poet said. 'My death
poem – I give this to you in remembrance. Please do not forget
it.'
  Quickly, for five journeyman librarians armed with lasers
were making their way down the corridor behind the cover of an
armoured, rolling, tutelary robot, the warrior-poet looked at
Hanuman and Danlo, then said:
Two friends
Joined left hand and right,
My death – my life.'
  The warrior-poet tilted his head back, facing the light of
the flame globes. At the same time, he raised both hands up and
together almost as if he were praying to the heavens somewhere
beyond the enclosing stones of the library. His straight arms
came to a point above him, like the spire of a cathedral. And
clasped between his hands was his killing knife, this gleaming
needle of steel. For an endless moment of time, he gazed upon
the knife's infinitely fine point. Then, with terrible force,
he plunged it straight down through his eye. His aim was
precise and true, and the knife drove home through bone and
cortex down into his brainstem. He died almost instantly, died
with the knife's ivory handle sticking out from his forehead as
if it were a
379
horn of some mythical beast; he died falling, and falling
slowly and forever to the stairwell's floor he died, even as
Danlo fell forward in a desperate surge to save his life. But
Danlo was too late. The warrior-poet fell to the floor with an
explosive outrush of breath and the possibility of infinite
pain upon his lips. It surprised Danlo that there was so little
blood.
  'His moment, oh, his moment – oh, oh, oh, oh!' This came
from Hanuman, who was laughing and crying and howling in pain,
all at once.
 After that the robot came and used a laser to cut Hanuman
free. One of the journeymen discovered Master Baran Smith dead
in his cell; he went to call for three litters, for Master
Smith and for the warrior-poet, and for Hanuman who had
collapsed in Danlo's arms. While the oldest of the journeymen –
an angry little woman named Kalere Chu – went to retrieve
Hanuman's clothes from his cell, Danlo let the other journeymen
hold the still-naked Hanuman away from the stairwell's icy
floorstones. Danlo went out into the corridor then: it took him
only a moment to find the warrior-poet's dart, which had
skittered across the floor and come to rest near a heating
grate. He returned to Hanuman's side, and before the journeymen
could stop him, he stabbed it into the muscle bunching up on
the side of Hanuman's neck. As the warrior-poet had said, the
drug gave Hanuman almost immediate unconsciousness.
  'What are you doing?' one of the journeymen asked him. This
was a large, frightened man scarcely more than twenty years
old. He was sweating and swallowing continually, as if he were
chewing on some unpalatable root that made him sick. He rudely
chastised Danlo and pushed him away. 'Do you want to kill him?'
 Danlo stood alone resting his bloody hand against the
stairwell's cold railing, and he watched Hanuman's tortured
eyes finally close into sleep and forgetfulness. 'Go to sleep,
my brother,' he whispered. Then he looked down at the
warrior-poet who was sleeping his final sleep, who
380
 had died the true death. He knew that he would never forget
the warrior-poet's last poem. And he would never forget the
terrible thing that the warrior-poet had said, that Hanuman li
Tosh was a murderer of men.
381



CHAPTER TWELVE

The Master of Novices

A wearer of the two rings must always carry two weapons: a
knife to cut away the lies of the body and a poem to lay bare
the truth of the mind.
 – maxim of Nils Ordando, founder of the Order of Warrior-Poets

During the days that followed, as the warrior-poet had
promised, the ekkana drug poisoning Hanuman did not leave his
body. Because Hanuman would have to bear the acid touch of the
ekkana for all his life, he was taken to the cetics' tower,
there to learn techniques for blocking nerve signals and
controlling his mind-pain. Although Danlo was not allowed to
visit Hanuman, a master cetic named Javier Hake kept him
apprised as to Hanuman's condition. Hanuman, as the master
cetic told Danlo, should rejoice that he was still alive, for
of the few persons known to have survived a warrior-poet's
knife, even fewer had been able to live with the ekkana burning
through their veins. Hanuman's mind and his power of will
clearly impressed the master cetic, which was not an easy thing
to accomplish since the cetics are usually as imperturbable as
stone.
 One morning at breakfast – while Hanuman practised aduhkha
and other healing attitudes with the cetics, while Danlo
worried over Hanuman and tried to remember all the events
leading up to their meeting with the warrior-poet – Danlo
finally received an invitation to visit Master Bardo's private
chambers. Indeed, it was more of a summons than an invitation,
and so, after gulping down his
382
 coffee and fetching his warmest fur, Danlo dashed out into the
cold, grey air. The night's snowfall had whitened the buildings
of Borja, and it was snowing still: tiny, irregular, broken
flakes that he knew as raishay. By the time he had reached the
Novices' Sanctuary, his cap, furs and his long black queue were
covered with raishay snow. So cold were the Sanctuary's long
stone hallways that the snow remained unmelted as he pulled off
his mittens and banged the steel knocker on the door of Bardo's
apartment. And then the door suddenly opened to waves of heat
that washed his eyes and turned the powdery snow to water.
  'Ah, Danlo, the warrior-poet didn't touch you, I see. By
God, don't just stand there letting in all cold air – come
inside and sit with me!' Bardo stood in the doorway, and with a
sweep of his massive arm, he invited Danlo inside. 'I like my
rooms warm, perhaps warmer than you're used to. Let me take
your furs before you faint.'
 Indeed, Bardo's fire room was too warm, and Danlo instantly
began to sweat. At either end of the room, stone fireplaces
were heaped with fatwood, which popped and crackled with orange
flames. Bardo wore only a single, thin robe over his
mountainous body. The robe was black, as a pilot's robe must
be, but it was made of the finest Japanese silk and embroidered
with platinum and gold strands. Around his fingers he wore
jewelled rings, and around his neck, seven silver chains.
Bardo's chambers were full of such finery: a shatterwood dining
table and outrageously expensive chairs carved on Urradeth;
Fravashi tondos and tapestries hanging from the walls; a piano,
gosharp, and synthesizer; and a chess table inlaid with
obsidian and white opal squares. Atop several low tables,
growing inside stone pots, were tiny bonsai trees thousands of
years old. Each tree, with its diminutive needles and twisting
branches, was exquisite. A succession of owners, supposedly
going back to the ancients on Old Earth, had cultivated the
trees and passed them on to their heirs or
383
 had sold them at market. Danlo thought it strange that full
men should spend lifetimes painstakingly binding and pruning
the limbs of plants in order to stunt their growth; he
marvelled at the care and art (and time) necessary to shape
them. If he had known anything about money, its scarcity and
value, he would have been astonished that the seven trees had
cost Master Bardo more than three thousand city disks each.
'Are you an aficionado of bonsai?' Bardo asked.
'No, sir.'
 'Well, I'm not either, any more. I once had twelve other
trees, but they died. Perhaps I'm not watering them properly.'
  Danlo reached out and stuck his finger inside one of the
pots, down into the sticky black soil. There was too much water
around the tree's roots, he thought; the trees were surely
being killed with water.
 'On the Day of Submission, Hanuman asked me if he could take
care of the trees,' Bardo said. There's something about bonsai
that fascinates him, I think. Ah, well, perhaps when he leaves
the cetics' tower. And I hope that is soon. I don't trust the
damn cetics – who does? The way they look at you as if they'd
like to cark your goddamned mind. The sooner Hanuman is free
from their spider's web of yogas and mind games, the gladder I
shall be.'
  Bardo wrapped his hand around Danlo's shoulder and fairly
pulled him across the room. 'Please, sit here,' he said,
indicating the beautiful seal-skin couch opposite the
fireplace. With a sigh and a smile he eased himself into an
immense, padded chair that he had imported from Summerworld
years ago. Although it was early morning, he had already been
drinking his favourite drug: a half-empty mug of black beer sat
on the chair's armrest. He leaned forward in the chair, elbows
on his thighs, and the firelight reflected ruby from his shiny
black beard. 'We have to talk, you and I.'
Danlo looked into Bardo's large brown eyes, which were
384
bright and full cunning, and he nodded his head. 'Master Bardo,
may I ask a question?'
  'Please, do. And henceforth, when we're alone, you may ask
your questions without first asking my permission.'
'Master Bardo, what happened in the library– '
 'Call me "Bardo", if you please. Just "Bardo". This is how
your father knew me.'
'My father– '
 'Your father,' Bardo said, again interrupting, 'was Mallory
Ringess. There, I acknowledge it. I knew it the first time I
saw you. In Lavi Square, during your test, naked as a whore and
freezing to death. You, with your wild face – everything about
you, the wild manner and style of the Ringess. I thought
perhaps he'd visited a courtesan once, and you were the result.
I never guessed you were Katharine's child, too. I should have
seen it,' here he sighed and paused to tap a massive finger
against his ugly, bulging forehead. 'Well, I did see it, with
my eyes, but my stupid brain denied the truth.'
'You were my father's best friend, yes?'
 Bardo looked at Danlo and rubbed the huge, plate-like muscles
over his heart. He began to speak slowly, as if to himself, and
there was bitterness in his voice. 'Can one be friends with
such a man? A man destined to become a god?'
 'But you joined him on his expedition to the Devaki!' Danlo
said. His mouth was dry and there was a swelling pain in his
throat. 'My father ... and my mother.'
  'We all followed the Ringess out to that damned frozen
island, it's true. To Kweitkel. We lived among the Devaki tribe
for most of a year.'
 'The Devaki,' Danlo said quietly, almost whispering. He
stared down at the gleaming wooden floor tiles. The blessed
Devaki.'
  'Ah,' Bardo said in a deep basso voice that rumbled across
the room. He took a long drink of his beer. 'Ah, you've heard
the story of your birth, have you? From Pedar, the afternoon
before he fell down the stairwell? The
385
 poor boy. Pedar showed you a foto of the expedition, isn't
that so? I suppose you'll want to know the truth about your
father, about our expedition. Well, it's too sad to say, but
your father with his wildness and his lust made enemies among
the Devaki. Your father, and your mother – your whole damn
family with their murderous hearts and incestuous ways. Of
course they made enemies. Ah, we made enemies. I, too. Yes, I
admit my part in this madness. The truth is, I was more than
Mallory's friend – he loved me like a brother! Once, long ago
it seems, and then the damn expedition. Your father killed a
Devaki man, Liam was his name, and his brother killed me,
pushed his damn spear through my heart! And yes we made
enemies, but we also made friends, and that's the hell of it, I
liked the Devaki, and they liked me. The women, of course,
Mentina and Nori and Tasarla, with their fat, long thighs, but
the men too, Haidar and Wemilo were my friends. And Choclo,
especially Choclo. It's too bad, Little Fellow, that you were
abandoned, but at least there was Soli to watch over you. Your
grandfather, as you must know. Soli the Silent – what can you
tell me about Leopold Soli, is he well?'
 Danlo watched Bardo suck down the last of his beer, and he
forced out, 'Soli is dead.'
 'Dead! The great Lord Pilot, dead at last? How did he die?'
 'At my passage into manhood, he ate the liver of a jewfish ...
and it poisoned him.'
 'That's too bad,' Bardo said. With his fat red tongue, he
licked beer foam from the inside of his mug. 'But tell me,
Little Fellow, why did Soli eat the liver? Where was Haidar –
why didn't Haidar help you with your passage?'
 'Haidar is dead, too.'
'Oh, that's too bad – I liked Haidar.'
'They are all dead.'
'What?'
'Everyone is dead, Bardo. The blessed Devaki tribe.'
386
'Dead, did you say? All of them? Choclo, too?'
'Yes.'
'Dead of what?'
'A disease.'
 'By God!' Bardo roared as he hammered the beer mug against
his chair. They were the strongest people I've ever known! How
can they all be dead?'
  Shaking his head, muttering to himself, Bardo rose to his
feet, and he grabbed up a pitcher of beer resting on the ledge
beneath the icy windows. He poured foamy black beer into his
mug, took a sip, then looked at Danlo as he licked beer from
his moustache.
 'A plague killed them,' Danlo said. 'A virus that men made,'
he touched the scar above his eye, then, and he told Bardo what
he had learned in the library about the Architects of the
Cybernetic Universal Church and the plague they had created.
  'Oh, too bad,' Bardo said. Drops of sweat broke out across
his fleshy face and tumbled down into his beard. Too bad.'
'My father infected the Devaki with this virus.'
 'A filthy bio-weapon!' Bardo said. He gazed out the window,
up at the snowy sky. He began speaking in a low, private voice,
as if he were alone in the room. 'Oh, no, this is very, very
bad! The worst thing I've ever heard. By God! We're all plague
carriers, then? I am, too. Why didn't the splicers warn us that
the Devaki carried no immunity? Why didn't I consider the
danger? Why else was I given this fine brain, if not to
consider such possibilities? And why not you, Mallory, my
friend? Ah, but you were always so reckless. Wild and reckless
– it was your goddamned fate.'
  Bardo's eyes were now rigid and glistening. A liquid lens of
tears had formed up, making his bright eyes seem even brighter,
intensifying the look of sadness there. With his moist red
lips, liquid eyes, sweat, and belly sloshing full of beer, he
seemed a most watery man. Waves of emotion
387
flowed across his huge face: guilt, compassion, self-pity, and
love, whether love only for the passion of loving, or love of
others, it was difficult to know. Danlo thought that such a man
would too easily feel the world's cold: at winter's first
breath, he would freeze as hard as galilka ice and then crack
into a thousand pieces.
  'All the Alaloi tribes, I think, have been infected,' Danlo
said. He pressed his thumbs against his own eyes and felt the
wetness there. He was reminded that, like all men, he too was
made mostly of water.
  'Ah, perhaps they are infected,' Bardo said. 'But we mustn't
suppose they're doomed. No, that would be too, too finally bad
– I can't suppose that, can I?'
  'But the shaida virus kills everyone it touches! Everyone
... who is innocent, everyone without an immunity.'
  'Well, there might be a way to provide your Alaloi with an
immunity.'
'Truly?'
 After taking another pull at his beer, Bardo patted his
rumbling belly and said, 'I know little of splicing, of course.
I'm a pilot. But why couldn't the suppressor genes that protect
you and me and every civilized person – why couldn't this DNA
be spliced into the Alaloi chromosomes?'
'Is that possible?' Danlo asked.
  'By God, I hope so! It seems a simple thing. Even if we have
to ferry every last Alaloi to the city splicers.'
  At this, Danlo rubbed his forehead in sudden worry. He
thought of everything that had happened to him since coming to
Neverness, and he said, 'Bringing the Alaloi to the Unreal City
... this might destroy them as a people.'
 'Would you rather see them all bleeding their brains out
through their ears?'
 Danlo looked into the fireplace and held his eyes open
against the heat. In the dark red flames of memory, he saw the
death fires burning in the Devaki cave the night that his tribe
had died. 'No,' he said.
388
  'Well, I suppose they could be returned to the wild once
we've cured them of this stupid plague.'
'But there are two hundred tribes!'
  'So many? It will be difficult, then, won't it? The
covenants will have to be suspended. Again.'
'What ... covenants?'
  Bardo belched and smiled, and he took a sip of beer. The
Alaloi were the first people to find this planet. When the
Order moved from Arcite three thousand years ago and found it
occupied by bands of wild men, well, we made a covenant with
them. Haven't you studied our history? We're confined to this
island, to Neverness. Contact with the Alaloi is forbidden.'
'But my father ... came to the Devaki tribe, yes?'
  'Ah, that's true. But, of course, he'd petitioned the
Timekeeper to suspend the covenants.'
 Danlo touched the white feather bound to his hair and said,
The covenants were suspended, once, and now the Devaki are
dead.'
'I'm sorry, Danlo.'
 'And you think the covenants should be suspended ... again?'
 'It's the only way. Now the Timekeeper is dead, we'll have to
petition the College of Lords.'
'Do you think they would grant such a petition?'
  Bardo rose from his chair and stood above Danlo. He wiped
the sweat from his cheek, belched, and said, 'By God, they'll
have to! We must undo what we've done. I must, you see. I,
Bardo – I have friends among the lords. They'll listen to me.
If there's a way to cure the Alaloi, we'll find it. I promise
you this, Little Fellow.'
 Danlo looked up at Bardo and smiled. It is understandable
that Bardo did not tell him that his influence over the Lords'
College was more in the realm of wishfulness than reality. In
truth, now that the death of Pedar Sadi Sanat had led directly
to a warrior-poet infiltrating the
389
library (or so some of Bardo's enemies believed), many lords
were calling for Bardo to resign as Master of Novices. It is
easy to forgive Bardo his misdirection and little lies. In
staring too long at Danlo's dark, deep-set eyes so grave and
full of hope, Bardo obviously lied out of compassion rather
than pride, and who can blame him for this?
  'I never guessed our little library would be such a
dangerous place for novices,' Bardo said. 'First, you discover
the source of this murderous virus, and then the warrior-poet.
It was too bad for that poor librarian – what was his name?
Master Smith. He's the first Orderman killed this way since
that insane warrior-poet ripped through the Danladi Tower and
nearly assassinated Leopold Soli fourteen years ago. It's a bad
sign that the warrior-poets are active again, too bad, so very
bad.'
 Bardo's flowery body stench and his beery breath were so
overpowering that Danlo stopped his breathing for a moment.
Then he said, 'I am afraid for Hanuman.'
  'Do you fear that another warrior-poet will try to kill him?
That's unlikely, now. By the laws of the poets' order, once a
contract has been fulfilled, there can be no more killing. Of
course, usually there is no one left alive to kill – it's
unbelievable that Hanuman survived the poet. And you as well.
You're as brave as your father. And twice as reckless – be
careful else you'll give the gossips too much to talk about,
you know.'
  Danlo smiled in embarrassment, then stood up and looked out
the window.
 'The puzzle here,' Bardo's voice boomed in his ear, 'is why
anyone would contract with the poets to kill Hanuman. Not only
why but who?'
 'You ... do not know?'
'Do you?'
  Because Danlo did not wish to discuss what had occurred in
the stairwell of the library, he turned to Bardo and asked,
'How could I know?'
390
 'By God, you still answer my questions with more questions!
Is this a trait bred into the goddamned Ringess chromosomes?'
'I am sorry.'
  'As Master of Novices, I must ask you certain things. The
College of Lords has charged me with this duty. Of course, it's
unlikely you would know what must be known, but it's possible
that the poet might have said some small thing that might be of
help in solving this puzzle. Few people know this – this is
something your father once told me – but the poets like to talk
to their victims before they kill them.'
 'I ... do not want to remember what the warrior-poet said.'
Danlo looked down at his boots, which were now dry from the
heat of the fire.
'No? You can't remember? Ah, how strange!'
 'I was afraid ... for Hanuman's life.'
'But you weren't afraid for your own.'
  Danlo lifted his head up and looked at Bardo, but he said
nothing.
 'You weren't too afraid to remember the poet's goddamned
poem!'
 'How do you know... I remembered it?'
  Bardo's cheeks puffed out for a moment, then he clapped his
hands together. 'How do I know? I shall tell you how. Do you
think I haven't been to see Hanuman? Well I have. He couldn't
tell me much, he could barely speak. But he remembered how you
tricked the warrior-poet, how you took his place beneath the
poet's knife. He admires your courage, as do I. And even more I
admire your cunning. You used ahimsa as a weapon to make the
poet let you recite the poem, and now the poet is dead. What
irony! You defeated a warrior-poet, by God! Like your father –
you must know that your father once defeated a warrior-poet,
too.'
  Because Danlo did not want Bardo to see his eyes just then,
he covered them with his hand and dropped his
391
head. 'I did not know ... that the warrior-poet would use his
knife against himself.'
 'Well, he did. You'd ruined his mission, and it was the only
way he could fulfil his contract with the goddamned
Architects.'
  At this, Danlo dropped his hand away from his forehead and
looked up.
 'Ah, this interests you, does it? Of course, it must have
been the Architects who hired the warrior-poet. Not the
harijan, as some of the stupider lords believe. Of course it's
true that the harijan blame both you and Hanuman for Pedar's
death. You, because of your devotion to ahimsa. You resisted
his barbarities, did you not? And you did so in a way that
shamed him and made him all too aware of his baseness. You
antagonized him wilfully, did you not? Ah, the angslan, this
Fravashi game of inflicting holy pain. It's a sweet, sweet
irony, but you tortured Pedar's soul more than he ever tortured
you. And so you goaded him into climbing the stairs after
lights out – it was almost inevitable that Pedar would drink
too much wine one night and fall to his death. Or so the
harijan say.'
 Danlo stared down at his hands for the count of twenty
heartbeats. And then he asked, 'But why blame Hanuman, too?'
  'Well, Hanuman is your closest friend, isn't he? It's known
that he antagonized Pedar whenever he had the chance.'
 'Then some of the lords must think that the harijan
contracted with the warrior-poets ... to murder both Hanuman
and me?'
  'Ah, and so they do. But there is a flaw in their thinking.
Much more than either you or Hanuman, the harijan blame me for
Pedar's death. If they had hired a warrior-poet, it would have
been I who would have had to face the goddamned knife.'
This thought must have unnerved Bardo, for he
392
suddenly rubbed his neck, belched and lifted up his mug, and
then, in three huge gulps, drained it of beer.
  'So, it must have been the Architects,' Bardo said. 'Since
the day that Hanuman took his vows, I've known that he fled
Catava before coming to Neverness. He told that there had been
trouble, that his family had made enemies with the Architect
Elders. His father, apparently, died under mysterious
circumstances. I suspect assassination – these bloody-minded
Architects are always killing each other. I don't know why they
would pursue Hanuman so far, so relentlessly. What could he
have done? Ah, well, it doesn't matter what he's done. Our
Order is as old and rotten as Lord Ciceron's stinking teeth,
but it's one of our virtues that we still protect our own.
Hanuman could have sold his DNA to a slel necker or even have
murdered his father – it wouldn't matter once he'd crossed the
Academy gates and taken his vows.'
  Although Bardo had spoken this last thought carelessly
without innuendo or hidden meaning, Danlo held his breath as if
a sudden cold wind had blasted his face. He dreaded hearing of
any connection, however inadvertent, between Hanuman and the
idea of murder.
 'I ... do not know why the warrior-poet was sent to
Neverness,' Danlo said. Indeed, the warrior-poet had never told
him the true reason why the Architects had contracted to kill
Hanuman. Although Danlo burned to know what this reason could
be, he did not want Bardo to know of his concern. 'But the
warrior-poet said a thing ... that I remember. He said there
was a new rule for the warrior-poets. A new rule that is an old
rule. He said the warrior-poets must kill all potential gods.'
  'Ah, ahhhh – aha!' Bardo rumbled. The poet said this to you,
did he? Is it true what he said? And if it is true, why should
he tell you?'
 'He asked me ... if I was the son of my father.'
  'Ahhhhhh! I can't tell how this interests me. The
warrior-poets had good cause to follow the career of your
393
 father. He began something, your father did. A man, a god –
he pushed against the universe, and so the warrior-poets feel
the heavens shake and they fear the stars must fall. Is this
why they must kill all potential gods? And what do they mean
by this word "potential"? Surely they can't mean they would
kill all the hakras of the Cybernetic Churches – the heretics
arise among the Architects like maggots out of a corpse. There
must be millions of them. Surely the poet would have killed
Hanuman for a reason other than his little heresies. Is there
something about Hanuman I've missed? Could the poets think
that Hanuman li Tosh would try to follow your father's path?
That he could follow it? Ah, what a thought – I can't tell you
how this makes me think!'
 So saying, Bardo began pacing about while he stroked his
beard and muttered a series of soft, rumbling sounds. Danlo
stood before the flames of the fireplace, and he too began to
brood about his thoughts and his memories. He remembered
perfectly what the warrior-poet had said about Hanuman
murdering Pedar. And he remembered that the path of his father
had been one of hubris and murder: Mallory Ringess once
murdered a man called Liam, and a warrior-poet, and three
pilots during the Pilots' War, and finally, fatefully, he had
murdered the entire tribe of the Devaki.
 'Listen,' Bardo finally said to him. 'It wouldn't do for us
to repeat mere hypotheses as to why the warrior-poet was sent
to find Hanuman. Do you understand? Perhaps it would be best if
you didn't tell anyone about this "new rule" of the
warrior-poets.'
 'I ... do not want to tell anyone.'
 'Good. Perhaps we shall never know why the warrior-poet was
sent. But here's another hypothesis: perhaps there was no
contract with the Architects after all. Perhaps the poet came
to Neverness because his masters on Qallar commanded him to do
so. Perhaps the poet had calculated the events in the library
to a nicety – he might have
394
 predicted that you would leave your cell and find him about to
murder Hanuman. This bloody torture as a test – of you. Could
this whole assassination merely have been staged as a test of
your potential? Ah, Danlo, Little Fellow – are you the son of
your goddamned father?'
  With this thought Bardo looked deeply into Danlo's eyes, so
deep that it seemed he was no longer looking at Danlo but at a
reflection of himself.
 'Ah, ah, ahhh – is it possible?' Bardo continued. 'Why
haven't I thought this thought before? Have I blinded myself or
merely been a coward? Is it possible? Is it possible that we're
all as children of your father's murderous heart, his mad,
marvellous soul? By God, who are you? Who am I? Who is anyone?
Is it possible that others might follow your father's way? I've
wondered about this every moment of every day for thirteen
years. The question is: why didn't I know that I wondered? Ah,
but now I know – and I know that I know, by God!'
 Bardo laughed his deep-bellied laugh as if he were immensely
pleased with the universe and all the things it contained, not
excluding himself. Then he suddenly clapped his hands and said
to Danlo, 'Although it's always a pleasure to talk with you,
there's another reason I invited you here today. It's time I
gave you what's yours.'
  He ambled over to the fire room's central table and kicked
aside a priceless chair blocking his way. On the table sat a
box inlaid with little pearl triangles and squares of
shatterwood. He picked up the box, carried it over to Danlo and
dropped it into his hands.
 'It is lovely,' Danlo said. The box was cool and hard to the
touch. He looked up at Bardo and smiled. Thank you.'
  'No, no, you misunderstand,' Bardo huffed out quickly. The
box is mine – I paid a hundred maunds for it on Urradeth!
What's inside belonged to your father. And mother. Open it,
now, what are you waiting for?'
 Danlo did as he was told. The lid swung open smoothly on gold
hinges, and he immediately smelled the mustiness
395
of old leather. Inside were two books, each as thick as a snow
block, and a clear stone that looked like quartz. And other
things. He ran his fingers along the inside walls of the box,
which were furry with black velvet. Because the box's interior
was deep and dark, it was difficult to determine all its
contents.
'Well?' Bardo said.
  Danlo stepped over to a priceless tea table and set the box
down. He lifted out one of the books, opened it, and flipped
through the dry, weathered pages. His eyes were wide open as he
said, 'I have seen this before! I have touched it ... with my
fingers, once, long ago.'
'What! How is that possible?'
 Outside the window snow covered the glidderies and fields of
Borja, and Danlo was reminded of another snow-field he had
crossed long ago. The memory was faint, perhaps only a memory
of a memory: once, just after his naming at his third birthday,
he and Soli had sledded away from Kweitkel's shore to find an
ikalu, a little hut of snow, flung up from the frozen sea. He
had entered the hut alone. There, he had discovered the very
book that he now held in his hands. Someone had taken the book
away from him – he could still feel his anger at being
dispossessed of it. And that was all he remembered. He, whose
memory of his life was usually so clear, could bring to mind
only these inchoate images and emotions. Because he thought it
shameful and strange that his memory should so mysteriously
fail him, he decided to say nothing more about it.
'Do you know what that is?' Bardo asked.
  'Yes,' Danlo said. 'It is a book. Old Father had many books
in his house. He ... taught me to read.'
  'You can read? Ah, I confess that I've never learned these
barbaric arts. I wonder why the Fravashi bother.'
 'But it is so simple!' Danlo said. 'Much simpler than
learning to kithe ideoplasts.'
'Indeed?'
396
 'Truly ... Bardo. Shall I teach you to read? It is a blessed
art.'
 'Now? Here?' Bardo's nose was as purple as a ripe bloodfruit,
and he had a strange, faraway look about his eyes. He was a
man who fell through moods as easily as he might change
clothes to go outside on a snowy afternoon. 'Perhaps some
other time – if I'm to help you with your Alaloi problem, I've
a busy day ahead of me.'
  Danlo opened the book to its title page, and as he did so,
the leather spine crackled and creaked. Aloud, he read, 'A
REQUIEM FOR HOMO SAPIENS.'
 'That was the Timekeeper's book,' Bardo said. 'A cynical
history of the human race. Your father inherited it from him –
or stole it, perhaps.'
 After turning a couple of yellow pages, Danlo came to a
passage that interested him:
   'Homo Sapiens as a mystery of evolution: It is both
mysterious miraculous that roughly the same intelligence
necessary to flake a barbed spearpoint is sufficient to
discover the theorems mathematics.
'In a different universe, it might have been otherwise.
 'And so human beings would have been spared the tragedy of
existing half as ape and half as god.'
 He read these words to Bardo, who stood above him puffing out
his fat cheeks.
 'Ah, but the Timekeeper was a cynical man, wasn't he? Read
this book at your own peril, Little Fellow.'
 With a smile on his lips, Danlo bowed his head, then reached
into the box to remove the other book. Its cover was of ancient
brown leather embellished with gold scrollwork around the
border. In many places, the gold had chipped or worn off.
 'A collection of poems, as you see,' Bardo said. The
Timekeeper once gave it to your father. As a present – we can
be sure of that, at least.'
Danlo read through the first few poems of the book and
397
 said, 'I cannot understand these words. The way the letters
are put together, the sounds ... make no sense.'
  'Well, most of the poems are ancient,' Bardo said. 'Written
in dead languages. Your father loved poetry – all poetry – as
other men love women.'
 'I shall have to learn these dead languages, then, to read
this book.'
'If you wish. I, myself, have never had the patience.'
'Thank you for giving me these books, Bardo.'
  'I have given you nothing.' Bardo stood next to the window,
licking the rim of his beer mug as he looked out into the
snow. 'I've merely held them in trust for your father, should
he ever return. Now they're yours. The truth is, I'm glad to
be rid of the responsibility.'
 Danlo watched him sadly swigging his beer, and he thought
that the huge man was not really glad at all. 'Thank you,
anyway,' he said.
 'Ah, well, I've been keeping more than books. The ring, of
course. And the ball. Take it out of the box, Little Fellow.'
  From the box Danlo removed a clear crystal ball. It was
slightly larger than his fist and heavy as a stone. Indeed, it
was the most perfect of stones, a scryer's sphere made of
diamond without impurity or flaw. 'Oh, I think this is a
blessed stone,' Danlo said. 'Imakla, like a thallow's eye.'
  'It belonged to your mother,' Bardo said. These spheres –
the scryers make them.'
'My mother ... was a scryer, yes?'
'She was one of the finest servers there's ever been.'
 Danlo held the diamond sphere up toward the window. Its
polished surface was brilliant with refracted colours; as he
turned it between his hands, quick bronze and violet lights
sparkled like tiny fireflies caught in ice. He looked through
the clarity of diamond, deep toward the sphere's centre. There,
all colour dissolved into a shimmering whiteness that dazzled
his eyes. 'I have never seen anything ... so splendid or rare,'
he said.
398
 'All scryers,' Bardo said, 'when they take their vows –
they're given these spheres. After Katharine died, your father
kept it instead of returning it to the Lord Scryer, as he
should have.'
 Because Danlo had smeared the diamond with his skin oils, he
breathed over the cool stone to condense a layer of mist and
then rubbed his sleeve around its surface until it shone
cleanly. 'Bardo,' he suddenly asked, 'do you know how my mother
died?'
 With a toss of his head and a few hard gulps, Bardo finished
the last of his beer. He used a silk handkerchief to wipe his
lips, and he said, 'Ah, Little Fellow, she died in the Devaki
cave, too bad. Giving birth to you – it was a hard birth, you
see, and she lost too much blood.'
 Danlo was looking at Bardo as he said this. He saw the blood
drain from his huge face, watched his eyes fall hard and shiny
as diamonds. He knew then (or thought he knew) that this sad,
passionate man could not be telling him the full truth.
 'Here,' Bardo said, too quickly, 'take the ring, and we'll be
done.'
 Again, Danlo reached into the box. He found the ring nestled
against thick velvet, and he grasped it tightly.
'Let's see it, now,' Bardo said.
 Danlo withdrew his arm and opened his fist. There, in the
centre of his palm was a ring of black diamond. It was a
pilot's ring, he knew, spun diamond stived with a unique
configuration of impurities, an atomic signature written in
iridium and iron that would distinguish it from all other
rings. He slipped it over his little finger, but it was
slightly too big.
 'Your father's ring, by God! You'd better not be seen wearing
it, or the other pilots will rip your finger off.'
'But someday I'll be a pilot, yes?'
'We can only hope so.'
'Can I wear the ring then?'
'This ring? No, no, Little Fellow, even if you grow into
399
it, you may not wear it. Each pilot must have his own ring –
you'll be given yours when you take your pilot's vows.'
  With a grunt and a sigh, Bardo pulled off one of his silver
chains and eased it over Danlo's head. 'But you may keep it on
your person,' he said. 'Put the ring on the chain around your
neck. There, clasp the chain like so, and keep it beneath your
robes where no one will see it.'
  'You are a generous man,' Danlo said as he tucked the ring
down into his kamelaika. The ring was cold, and he felt it
pressing the skin over his breastbone. 'Thank you.'
'You're welcome.'
 'My father entrusted this ring to you before he left
Neverness?'
'He did, and it was the saddest moment of my life.'
'Where is my father, do you know?'
  Bardo rubbed his eyes and sighed. 'All I know is what
everyone knows: Mallory Ringess disappeared with his ship six
years ago. There's evidence he went into the Solid State
Entity. He'd prophesied once that he would join with that
goddamned goddess, but I never really believed him. And now
he's gone.'
 For a long time Danlo stared into the fire as he held his
fist pressing the ring over his heart. And then he asked,
'Bardo, what is he? Do you know what my blessed father is?'
 'He's a god!' Bardo suddenly called out. 'A goddamned god.'
 'But what does it mean ... to be a god?'
'Only a god would know.'
'Then– '
  'Your father,' Bardo interrupted, 'was the first to
remembrance the Elder Eddas. And perhaps the only one to
remembrance them deeply. He looked inside himself and found the
secret of life – the secrets of the gods. I believe he's found
the secret of immortality. Great power, these powers of mind
that the gods must love above all things.'
While listening carefully, Danlo never let his eyes fall
400
away from the fire, and he said, To be a god must be ...
nothing but pain.'
'Eh? Why do you think that?'
 'I... do not know.'
  'Well, certainly your father has paid a heavy price for his
godhood. He's carked his goddamned brain! Two-thirds of it has
been replaced by neurologics, by these bio-computers that the
Agathanians made for him when they brought him back from his
death.'
'But part of him is still human, yes?'
'Perhaps.'
  'And this human part, the man that he still is – does he
exist in his body? Of his body? Is he a being of blood and
bone, just as you or I?'
  'Ah,' Bardo said, 'the crucial question. But the truth is, I
don't know.'
 'But if his brain is still partly human,' Danlo insisted, 'if
his heart beats as a man's heart, then he must exist ...
somewhere. Somewhere in spacetime.'
'Perhaps.'
 'Then, does he still dwell in the Immanent Carnation? Around
which star does his lightship circle?'
'How should I know, by God!'
'But you were his best friend!'
 'I believe,' Bardo said as he moved back over to the window,
'I believe that he's been lost into the Entity. Absorbed, in
his mind, if not body.'
'My father ... has gone over, then?'
  'Not really. Ah, there's been a kind of marriage. It's a
mystical notion, and I detest mysticism, but I'm coming to
believe it's true.'
'Why?'
 Bardo rapped his rings against the window pane and pointed up
at the sky. 'How else can one explain the timely appearance of
the Golden Ring? I believe that it's the child of your father's
mind. And of the Entity's.'
Danlo looked out the window, then, and he saw that
401
the snow had stopped. The sky was like a sodden grey blanket,
heavy and too low. He thought of the Golden Ring growing far
above the clouds of the atmosphere, and he vowed that if ever
he became a pilot, he would journey there to see what kind of
creatures his father had designed. He unzipped his kamelaika,
touched the ring Bardo had given him, then asked, 'Do you think
the Golden Ring will shield the animals of the world from the
Vild's radiation? Truly?'
'That was your father's plan – he always had a plan.'
'Then the life of this world ... will continue to live?'
  'By God, I hope so, since I'm still alive on this god-frozen
place!'
 'Then my father has slain a people ... and saved a world.'
'Well, he was always a man of irony, your father.'
  Danlo pressed his knuckles against his forehead and softly
recited,' "Halla is the way of the man who cherishes the
world".'
'Eh? Halla?'
  'I should leave now,' Danlo said. He stood up and squeezed
the diamond sphere in his hand. He was sweating, and his eyes
hurt from staring too long at the sky. He thought of his
father, who had once murdered Liam of the Devaki tribe and many
others, and he whispered, 'Shaida is the way of the man who
kills other men.'
 Bardo, whose hearing had always been acute, shook his head at
these words. He said, 'You shouldn't judge him, Little Fellow.
Even when he was a man, he wasn't like other men.'
'Truly?'
  'No, he was fated to become a god. I see that now,' Bardo
reached down to grab the empty pitcher of beer from the window
sill. He was smiling to himself now, and his moist brown eyes
seemed full of memories and dreams. 'Can you imagine what it's
like to become a god?'
With his free hand, Danlo touched Bardo's sweaty
402
forehead, and then scooped up the two old books sitting atop
the tea table. He worked them up beneath his arm, and said
again, 'I should leave.'
 'Wait! You've too much to carry – you should have at least
one arm free, else you'll fall and split your face on the ice.'
Bardo picked up his jewelled box and handed it to Danlo. 'Put
the books in here. The ball, too. And keep the box, if you
please.'
'Thank you,' Danlo said.
'Where are you going in such a hurry?'
 'To the cetics' tower,' Danlo said. 'Perhaps Master Javier
will allow me to visit Hanuman today. There is a question ...
that I must ask him.'
  'Ah, well, I'll send for you in a few days, then. The
College of Lords will have to give us a decision about the
Alaloi, and I want you to be there.'
Danlo pulled his furs on and bowed. Thank you, Bardo,' he said.
 He left the Sanctuary then, and as he struck out across the
slick glidderies of Borja to ask Hanuman a simple question, he
was very careful not to drop the box that the Master of Novices
had given him.
403



CHAPTER THIRTEEN

In the College of the Lords

 I am not interested in things getting better; what I want is
more: more human beings, more dreams, more history, more
consciousness, more suffering, more joy, more disease, more
agony, more rapture, more evolution, more life.
 – from the Meditations of Jin Zenimura

It did not take very long for Bardo to provoke a decision from
the Lords' College concerning the plight of the Alaloi people.
While Hanuman remained sequestered with the cetics (during
which time the master cetic still refused to let Danlo visit
him) Bardo petitioned the Lords' College on behalf of Danlo and
all two hundred and twelve tribes of the Alaloi. As it
happened, the lords were eager to dispose of this troublesome
petition, just as they were fairly frantic to clear up the
harijan problem and the mystery of why a warrior-poet would try
to assassinate a mere novice. In truth, many of the lords were
eager to dispose of Bardo altogether. These enemies of Bardo,
serious men and women thrice his age, dismissed Bardo as merely
a young pilot of braggadocio and bombast. Some said he was too
careless (and brutal) to be Master of Novices. Nassar wi Jons,
the Lord Imprimatur, had decried his sloppy inquest of Pedar's
murder; quite a few others blamed him for instigating the cruel
competition in which too many petitioners had died in Lavi
Square. As Bardo discovered in the days after he had given
Danlo his father's ring, few lords seemed worried over the fate
of the Alaloi tribes. And no one wanted to suspend the
covenants at a time when the
404
 whole Order was overwhelmed with more cosmic concerns.
  'By God, they're fools!' Bardo said to Danlo one night when
he paid a visit to Perilous Hall. 'Cowards and fools – they
think only of the doomed, man-cursed stars!'
  He went on to admit his fear that the College of Lords might
not give their petition the deep consideration it deserved. The
Lords of the Order, he said, were too eager to return to their
debate concerning whether a second mission should be sent to
the Vild.
  There's even talk of establishing a second academy within
the Vild,' Bardo said. 'A fissioning of the Order, a legal
schism to extend our power. And to prevent the Cybernetic
Universal Church from exploding more goddamn stars. Talk is
what it is, the old lords love to talk, to blather on and on.
Did you know that they've been talking about this question for
six years, since the First Vild Mission returned in failure?
Listen to what I say, Little Fellow: you'll have grown into
your manhood and taken your pilot's vows before the lords ever
stop talking and act. Ah, why did your father abandon us to be
run by a barbaric council? It's beyond understanding! When your
father was Lord of the Order – and the Timekeeper before him! –
things were accomplished.'
  It is a sad truth that rule by council is the most
inefficient and corruptible means of government. At the time
Bardo petitioned to suspend the covenants, the College of Lords
was a testament to the evolution of both inefficiency and
corruption. Six years previously, after Mallory Ringess so
unexpectedly had left the City, the Lords of Neverness had been
empowered to decide the Order's future. For as long as anyone
could remember, the imperious, fierce old Timekeeper had ruled
the Order, and then, for a brief moment in history, so had
Mallory Ringess. And so the Lords had grown weary and fearful
of rule by a single Lord, and so they had decided that there
would never be another Timekeeper or single Lord of the Order.
During the year
405
 of 2942, the College of Lords – the 121 lords of the various
disciplines – had tried to rule by consensus. It was a noble
experiment in democracy, an attempt to reform the Order's most
venerable institutions, but it had failed. Of course it had
failed. The very nature of the Order, its soul and name,
implies an ordering of each individual's passions, conceits and
dreams. Those who give themselves to the quest to discover the
universe's ineffable truths, if they take vows and join with
others who share a calling, must find their place within a
hierarchy organized around a singular vision. If they do not,
there will be chaos; in time, they will discover a hundred or a
thousand individual truths which will destroy all order,
pulling apart human-made structures as surely as a flock of
hungry gulls dismantles a whale's corpse. So, there must be a
unifying vision, and vision is the glory of a single living
organism, whether woman or man, or an animal finding its way
across the icefields of the world. In truth, a council of human
beings has less vision than a snowworm burrowed into a drift.
The Lords of the Order, in the first year of their ascendency,
found themselves squabbling endlessly over rules of order,
protocol, religious and political definitions, and over
creationism or cybernetic gnosticism or other ideologies. The
old lords never agreed about anything, or rather, the only
consensus they reached was that consensus democracy could not
work. And so they had reorganized. Thereafter, the College
would decide all important questions by a vote of two-thirds
majority; they appointed four of the most prominent lords to
set agenda, to make administrative decisions and break
deadlocks when the vote in the College was tied. These four
lords – they called themselves the Tetrad – had gradually
gained power. On the third day of midwinter spring in the year
2944 since the founding of Neverness, the Tetrad proposed a new
canon giving themselves the authority to decide which matters
were important enough to submit to the College, and to
'dispose' of those which were not. Most
406
lords, to their everlasting shame, were glad to be relieved of
the petty decisions that consumed so much of their time, and
they had voted to instate this canon. In the three and a half
years since then, the Tetrad had deemed few matters worthy of
the other lords' trouble. (The debate over the second mission
to the Vild was almost the single issue the College kept to
itself.) In effect, the four lords of the Tetrad had become the
real rulers of the Order. Although Bardo despised the entire
College of Lords as blind fools, he reserved the most acid part
of his anger for the Tetrad.
 'They call themselves the Tetrad,' Bardo said. 'I call them
the Four Barbarians, all of them. Especially Chanoth Chen
Ciceron. He told me the Tetrad had no power to suspend the
covenants. And that's a damn lie, the Tetrad does what it damn
pleases. Lord Ciceron said that only the entire Lords' College
could suspend the covenants – and then he told me that the
Tetrad would not burden the College with a request to make such
a decision at this time! By God, these old lords gall me! They
don't like to listen. Ah, but I finally gained the Lord
Akashic's ear, otherwise it would be too bad for us, and worse
for the poor Alaloi. Nikolos the Elder – he used to be your
father's friend, and mine. His powers have spoiled him, too
bad, but at least he still honours friendship. He persuaded
Lords Ciceron, Pall and Vasquez to put the question to the
College. They're convening on the 74th, the entire College of
Lords, and so we'll have our answer then.'
 On the morning of the convocation, Danlo donned his
uncomfortable formal clothing. The formal robe, cut all of a
piece, was roomy enough below the waist, where the pantaloons
billowed out to allow his legs free play for skating. But,
because his body had thickened with muscle since his first days
at Borja, the fine white wool pulled too tightly across his
chest and shoulders. In fact, the robe was so tight that he had
to ask for Madhava li Shing's help in working the zipper closed
up his back.
'May I touch you?' Madhava asked in his sarcastic but
407
friendly way. 'May I touch the only novice in the history of
the Order who has defeated a warrior-poet?'
  Danlo smiled sadly as he put on the tight wool jacket, his
cap, gloves and fur cloak that completed his attire. He
fastened the steel chains holding his cloak in place, and he
said, somewhat mysteriously, 'I ... defeated no one. In the
end, the warrior-poet had his triumph.'
 He met Bardo beneath the cold flame globes lining the steps
of that square, white building called the College of the Lords.
The air was frigid and harsh with little sounds: ice being
chipped away from stone steps, skate blades ringing and the
faraway music of children's voices. Although the clocks of the
City had marked the beginning of a new day, by Danlo's
reckoning it was still night. It was late in the darkest of
seasons, and the deep winter sun would not rise for hours.
Below them, thirty yards to the north, the Shih Grove's hundred
and twelve trees glittered silver under the intense starlight.
 'Ah, Danlo, there you are!' Bardo called out. 'Listen,
there's something I should warn you about. A few nights ago, I
drank too much beer, as I sometimes do. There is the slightest
possibility that I might have told the story of you defeating
the warrior-poet to certain persons of low character who can't
keep secrets. Perhaps they told their friends. You should
prepare yourself for questions – I think there'll be many
gossips who'll want to know how you remembered that goddamned
poem. Ah, why is it my fate to always be making legends of
other people?'
 Danlo smiled at him and said, Thank you for warning me.'
 Bardo snorted and stamped his huge boots against the
white-granite steps. 'By God, Little Fellow, it's cold! Let's
go inside and drink coffee while we wait – likely the lords
will keep us waiting all day before they blather their way to a
decision.'
 Bardo was dressed brilliantly, in black sable and gold, but
his furs stank of spilled beer. His breath was yeasty
408
 with alcoholic vapours, his eyes bleary and red as if he'd
been drinking all night. Up the steps he plodded, and at every
fourth or fifth step, he let loose a resounding belch. Twice he
farted, loudly. Danlo, who was beginning to wonder how this
huge buffoon of a man could help save the Alaloi people when he
couldn't even save himself from stupefaction, followed close
behind. He was afraid that Bardo would at any moment stumble
and break open his head. Bardo, though, was used to drinking
great quantities of his beer drug, and he kept his feet. In his
great, booming voice he called out for the College doors to be
opened, and the doors were opened. A novice dressed in formal
robes met them at the top of the steps. He bowed to Bardo,
nodded at Danlo, and he led them through the doorway, down a
long draughty hall and into an anteroom off the main council
chamber. There they found a blue pot of coffee and two blue
mugs set out atop a plain wooden table. There was no other
furniture, nor rugs, nor decoration of any sort in the plain,
cold room.
  'By God, this is an insult!' Bardo huffed out. He poured
coffee into the mugs, and with an unsteady hand, held one of
them out to Danlo. 'I should call for chairs – do they expect
us to sit on stone? Or keep us standing all day?'
 As it happened, the lords did not keep them waiting all day;
although it might have been better if they had. If Bardo's
bodily tissues had been allowed more time to metabolize the
beer poisoning his brain, he might have knelt before the Lords'
College with clear eyes and tight lips, and the future of the
Order and Neverness might have unfolded in a very different
way. If – the subtlest of all words. As the scryers teach,
though, ifness is an illusion. Or rather, it is our belief in
pure chance that is illusory. According to the ancient
metaphor, the events of one's life, each of the billion billion
'ifs' and moments of possibility are like water molecules
tumbling along a river. However chaotic the little whorls and
eddies may seem, the river itself flows in
409
 only one direction, towards the sea. As with life: whatever
has happened will have happened, the scryers say. And so, in
the deepest sense, Bardo chose his own future and drew it
forth roaring into reality by the force of his will alone.
  Before either of them had finished their first coffee, the
novice returned and said, 'It's time; the College will decide
your petition now. Master Pilot, Wild Danlo, if you please,
come with me.'
  The novice crossed the room and slid open the rear door.
Danlo followed him and Bardo out into the main council chamber.
All at once, as when stepping from a cave into the open, Danlo
was overwhelmed by new sensations: there was light everywhere,
streaming in cold colours from the flame globes, filling the
huge chamber with reflected reds and blues and golds. The
circular walls were polished white granite; high above him,
where the chaotic noises of the room bounced around and fell
through the open spaces, a great clary dome let in the
starlight. There was a coldness in the air, emanating in waves
off the black floor stones, and Danlo thought of the chamber as
a very inhuman place, even though many people were waiting for
him there. The Lords of the Order – there were one hundred and
ten gathered there that day – sat behind tables of glistening
jewood. The crescent-shaped tables were arrayed in concentric
half-circles around the far side of the chamber; four or five
lords shared each table. As Danlo made his way nearer, the eyes
of each lord fell upon him. He heard many voices, the muffled
rush of a hundred breaths, and there was a gradual silence. The
novice invited Bardo and him to kneel on a square Fravashi
carpet in the chamber's very centre. The lords were close all
around him, close enough that he could see their black or brown
or blue eyes staring down from their stern faces. Many of the
lords were ancient, some of them with their second or third
remade bodies. He smelled the sickly sweet decay of oldness and
the pungent hormone perfumes concocted to
410
 neutralize and mask the stench. The jewood tables reeked of
lemon oil polish. So powerful were these smells – and Bardo's
beery aroma and his own acrid sweat – that he scarcely heard
the novice announce them: 'My Lords, the Master Pilot and
Master of Novices, Pesheval Lal, called "Bardo" and the novice,
Danlo wi Soli Ringess.'
  At the centre table, directly in front of Danlo and aligned
facing the chamber's great double doors, sat the four lords
known as the Tetrad.
 One of them, a tall thin, delicate man with cropped hair and
black teeth, looked straight at Danlo. He was Chanoth Chen
Ciceron, the Lord Pilot, and he said: 'Danlo wi Soli Ringess,
we are pleased you could join us today. Even though Master Lal
has approached us on your behalf, since you are in fact the
primary petitioner, the College will direct its remarks to you.
Is this agreeable to you, Young Novice?'
  Danlo looked at Lord Ciceron's soft face and thought of what
Bardo had said about him: that here was a man, the oldest of
all the pilots, who lied out of habit as easily as a boy
squashes flies, who was often devious without being clever,
voluble but rarely speaking what others thought of as the
truth.
 He was also, for all his years, an impatient man. When Danlo
did not respond immediately, he repeated, 'Young Novice, is
this agreeable to you?'
'Yes,' Danlo finally said.
'Excellent.'
  'Well, Lord Pilot,' Bardo's voice boomed out, 'it's not
agreeable to me! What am I, a lump of stone to bounce your
words off? The Alaloi have been infected by a filthy virus; I'm
involved in their fate, by God!'
  He knelt there sweating and glowering at Chanoth Chen
Ciceron. He did not explain that he, Bardo the Bull, who was
famous as a rakehell and swiver of women, had infected many of
the young Alaloi women with his semen, if not with the plague
virus itself.
411
 Lord Ciceron turned and nodded to the other Lords of the
Tetrad. On his right sat the Lord Ecologist, Mariam Erendira
Vasquez and Nikolos the Elder. Nikolos was a plump, quiet man
whose natural tendency toward timidity was balanced, in times
of crisis, by a staunchness and a steely will to action. He was
famous for helping to organize the schism that had led to the
Pilots' War and the Timekeeper's downfall thirteen years
previously. Of the four lords of the Tetrad, he was the most
respected, the most well liked. And Audric Pall, the Lord
Cetic, sitting at Lord Ciceron's left, was the most feared.
Lord Pall suffered from the rare genetic malady of albinism:
his skin and hair were the colour of bleached bone and his eyes
were pink, as if the irises had been smeared with a mixture of
milk and blood. He was very old. Now that the Timekeeper was
dead, he claimed to be the oldest person in the City. He
exchanged glances with Lord Ciceron and made an intricate sign
with his gnarled fingers. Lord Pall never uttered a word. He
was well known for communicating only in signs, or in the
secret facial language of the cetics. Some said that he had
been born a mute; others – and these were mostly his students –
held that he merely had lost the habit of speaking and his
vocal cords had withered from neglect and nonuse. Danlo knelt
on the carpet and stared up at this horrible old man; he
thought Lord Pall must be possessed of sublime and corrupt
inner powers, truly a man of shaida: cynical, jaded, brilliant
and barely human.
  Lord Ciceron rapped his pilot's ring against the table and
spoke to Bardo. 'Lord Pall reminds us, Master Pilot, that, much
as we all desire to be enlightened by your opinions, you may
not speak here unless a question is directed at you. Is this
agreeable to you?'
'As agreeable as drinking piss,' Bardo muttered.
'What did I hear you say?'
  Danlo, kneeling straight-spined on his carpet, looked back
and forth between Lord Ciceron and Bardo. He knew
412
 that there had been enmity between the two men even before
they had taken opposite sides in the Pilots' War. During
Bardo's journeyman years at Resa, Lord Ciceron had been the
harshest and cruellest of all Bardo's tutors. Then, too, Lord
Ciceron's elevation to the lordship of the pilots still
obviously rankled Bardo – everyone knew that he had coveted
that highest of ranks for himself and resented everything about
Chanoth Chen Ciceron. Bardo's cheeks were puffed out, his face
flushed purple from too much beer. He glared at Lord Ciceron,
then called out, 'How should I know what you heard me say?'
  Bardo's belligerence did not make a good impression on the
Tetrad, nor on the rest of the lords. They sat at their tables,
shaking their heads and whispering to one another. Kolenya Mor,
the Lord Eschatologist, and Jonath Parsons, Rodrigo Diaz,
Mahivira Netis and Burgos Harsha, with his serious,
glass-pocked face – the greatest Lords of the Order admonished
Bardo with their disapproving countenances. They looked down at
Danlo as if they pitied anyone whose fate was interwoven with
such a rude man.
 'Master Pilot,' Chanoth Chen Ciceron said to Bardo, 'is it
wise to insult those from whom you beg such extraordinary
favours?'
  Bardo turned to Danlo and laid his heavy arm across his
shoulders. He tilted his head until it touched Danlo's. All the
lords, as Danlo was keenly aware, were watching the two of
them. Although he could scarcely breathe and wanted to push
Bardo away, he held himself rigid, in the posture of formal
politeness. And then he heard Bardo whisper, 'Piss on him! Ah,
but this Lord Ciceron is a man of lies and pretensions: he
pretends that our actions, our words or demeanour, can still
sway the College. Well, look at their faces, Little Fellow! You
don't have to be a cetic to see that the old bones have already
made their decision, too bad.'
 Danlo looked up at the lords, resplendent in their formal
robes of amber, indigo, grey, and a hundred other colours.
413
Their faces, he saw, were indeed hard with resolve and
decision.
 'Master Pilot, you may not speak to the boy – is this
understood? If you can't restrain yourself, you'll be removed
from this convocation.'
  At this, Bardo let loose a belch and glowered at Lord
Ciceron, but for the moment, he kept his silence.
  'And now,' Chanoth Chen Ciceron said, 'we invite Lord
Vasquez to address the petitioners.'
 Sitting next to Lord Ciceron, the fourth lord of the Tetrad,
Mariam Erendira Vasquez, smoothed out the folds of her viridian
robe. She had a square, cheerful face and a reputation for
clear thinking and pragmatism. She smiled at Danlo, and he
liked her immediately, even though her first words discouraged
him: 'Danlo wi Soli Ringess, we are sorry to say that your
petition to the Lords' College to suspend the eighth covenant
has been made with false assumptions and false hopes. Before we
vote your petition, yes or no, we must explicate the nature of
this falsity.'
  In her clear, cold voice, Lord Vasquez spoke of the War of
the Faces and of the plague virus that the Architects of the
Old Cybernetic Church – with the help of the warrior-poets –
had designed to murder their enemies. She kneaded her small,
square hands together and half-turned in her chair, addressing
the Lords of the College, as well as Danlo. She described the
way in which the virus DNA had embroidered itself into its
victims' chromosomes, becoming, inevitably, a part of every
civilized person's genetic inheritance. The virus can be
thought of as a genetic disease that has remained dormant in
most human beings for nearly a thousand years. And now,
unfortunately, the tribes of pseudo-primitives known as the
Alaloi most probably have been infected with the plague virus.
A virus which, in them, is non-dormant. This is a disaster for
these people because this is a disease that has no cure.'
 A disease that has no cure – Danlo silently repeated this
phrase to himself, and his fists clenched, and his collar was
414
 suddenly too tight against his throat. Listening to the Lord
Ecologist speak of the Alaloi's certain death concentrated and
intensified his awareness: he heard the wind driving ice
particles against the dome, while nearer to him Bardo grunted
in anger and Chanoth Chen Ciceron sucked at his blackened teeth
and sighed. Many of the lords were sighing; many of them were
facing Danlo, eye to eye, and their eyes were hard with pity.
All around him, the cracked granite walls and pillars bespoke
the rigidity of an Order which, across the millennia, had made
too many hard decisions. Lord Vasquez's clear voice echoed off
the walls: 'A disease that has no cure.' Danlo closed his eyes,
then, and he remembered one of the hardest sayings of his
tribe: Ti-anasa daivam – love your fate. For the first time he
reflected how strange it was that the word, anasa, as the
Alaloi used it, could mean either to love or to suffer.
'Danlo wi Soli Ringess.'
 Danlo opened his eyes and looked up, aware that Lord Vasquez
was addressing him. 'Yes?' he said.
  'Do you understand that a cure for this disease has never
been found?'
'I understand ... but I do not understand.'
'How may I enlighten you?'
  'The imprimaturs,' Danlo said, 'ages ago, they sequenced the
entire human genome, yes?'
'This is true, Young Novice.'
 'Then why isn't it possible to identify and cut out the virus
segments of DNA? And if each ... civilized person has inherited
genes that suppress this DNA, why can't these genes be spliced
into the Alaloi people?'
  Lord Vasquez twisted the wool of her bright green robe
between her hands and said, 'You speak as if engineering were a
simple thing. It's not – it's hideously complex. You must
understand that, in general, there is no one-to-one mapping of
a gene with a specific structure or function within the
organism.'
'In truth?'
415
 'Consider,' Lord Vasquez said, 'an imago used in the planning
and construction of a building. Each point of light, each
stone, archway or spire that you can see looking at the
hologram or simulation, each of these images represents, in a
one-to-one manner, the exact structure to be expressed in the
completed building. But DNA is not like a building imago.'
 Danlo waited a few moments for her to continue, then asked,
'What is it like?'
  'It's more like a recipe for baking a cake. A set of
instructions, Young Novice. Millions of simultaneous
instructions. If the DNA code – the instructions – is expressed
in the proper manner, an organism is constructed. Do you
understand? So few people do. So many think it's an easy thing
to engineer for an extra thumb or purple eyes. But it's
hideously difficult. Could you bake a cake in the shape of a
cathedral merely by adding extra flour or deleting eggs from
the batter while raising the heat of the oven? No, of course
not, and sometimes it's impossible to engineer one's genetic
inheritance in the desired manner.'
  Lord Vasquez went on to explicate the complexity of the
plague virus. It was theorized, she said, that the virus DNA
had stitched itself into at least five of the twenty-three
human chromosomes, in certain loci actually replacing exons,
the working genes vital to life. The virus was a duplicitous
kind of DNA: at times, when suppressor genes kept parts of it
turned off, it coded for the production of proteins necessary
for all bodily metabolism. At other times, it produced –
reproduced – the viral elements that had killed the Devaki
tribe. Cutting the virus out of the genome likely would kill
anyone so engineered, that is, assuming the virus DNA could be
identified and edited. In fact, it could not be. In fact, there
was much about the function and interactions of the three
billion nucleotides of the human genome that remained unknown.
It was unknown, for instance, exactly which genes suppressed
the virus. The imprimaturs theorized that certain of the
416
genome's introns – the so-called 'nonsense' genes separating
the exons – might code for vital functions. These fossil genes,
after lying dormant and useless for thousands (or even
millions) of years, sometimes could come suddenly alive and
suppress the viral genes. No one knew what quickened these
suppressor genes. The environment in which they either thrived
or failed was one of chaos, the chemicals of life that existed
in a delicate, dynamic imbalance.
 'Consider the human organism as an ecology,' Mariam Erendira
Vasquez, the Lord Ecologist, said to Danlo. 'Consider what
happens to an ecosystem when its predators are destroyed –
disaster. Similarly, it's often impossible to cut out unwanted
genes without harming the organism.'
  Danlo touched the white feather in his hair. Although he
immediately saw Lord Vasquez' point, he said, stubbornly, 'But
predators do not slay all of their prey animals, else they
would then starve. The plague virus is a disease ... that will
slay all the Alaloi.'
'But not all human beings.'
  'You have already made your decision, then.' Danlo looked up
at the lords of Neverness sitting above him. Their faces were
stony and hard, much like the countenances carved into the
statues of the Order's most famous lords that stood in a grim
circle around the walls of the chamber. 'Have you ever seen
anyone die ... of the slow evil?' he asked.
  Lord Vasquez evaded his question, saying, 'It's a disaster
for your Alaloi, but it is not an arbitrary disaster. It's well
known that the ancestors of the Alaloi carked their
chromosomes. No doubt they engineered out certain unwanted
introns. It's possible they cut out segments of the suppressor
DNA by mistake. Certainly they altered the ecology of their
bodies – and doomed themselves to die of this plague.'
  Danlo held his fingers against the scar on his forehead. 'Mi
pela lalashu, the ... blessed people, doomed.'
417
 'It's what comes of degrading or editing a cell's
information,' Lord Vasquez said.
'Shantih,' Danlo whispered.
 'The Order's splicers,' Lord Vasquez said, 'were not able to
cure the disease at the time of the plague a thousand years
ago. Nor since then. Nor the engineers of Urradeth. Even the
Agathanians, according to our librarians, have pronounced it
incurable. Can you understand this?'
 'Yes,' Danlo said. And then, after considering that the
Agathanians, in their mastery of biological engineering, were
like gods, he intoned, 'Ti-anansa daivam.'
  Lord Vasquez forced a smile and asked, 'What does this
mean?'
 'It means, "Suffer your fate". You must love what you
suffer.'
  'I'm sorry, Young Novice,' Lord Vasquez said in her kindly,
if officious, way. 'But there can be only one fate for your
Alaloi. Can you accept this?'
'No.'
'We know it's difficult, Young Novice.'
  Danlo was aware of Bardo breathing heavily next to him,
staring at him, obviously intent on his every word. 'It is true
we must love our fate,' Danlo said. 'Only ... no one knows his
fate until his life is lived.'
'The scryers would dispute this belief.'
  'Fate,' Danlo said softly. And then, 'A disease that has no
cure. But ... how can we know this?'
  Just then Lord Pall flashed Danlo a keen look and turned to
Lord Nikolos. His ancient fingers began writhing like worms.
Perhaps only a third or a fourth of the other lords understood
the cetics' sign language. Those who did not watched Lord
Pall's precise motions with looks of annoyance and boredom
colouring their faces.
  'Lord Pall,' Nikolos said, interpreting for the Lord Cetic,
'would remind our Young Novice that, of course, we can't
absolutely know of the impossibility of a cure for this
disease.'
Four hundred eighteen
  And then Lord Ciceron added in his silky, insincere voice,
'We can, however, calculate the cost to the Order of a quest
for a cure. We can weigh the benefits and chances of success –
which are almost nil – against this cost.'
 'Calculate!' a great voice suddenly boomed out. Bardo pounded
his fist against his knee and glared at Lord Ciceron. 'Costs!
Benefits! What are we, barbaric merchants who put a price on
even the most priceless of things?'
  'Be silent!' Lord Ciceron ordered. 'I shall not tell you
this again.'
  'Ah,' Bardo said. He looked down at the pilot's ring
glistening darkly against his finger. He fell into silence,
then, a silence as dark and fearsome as deep space.
  Lord Ciceron turned away from Bardo and looked at the other
lords. He said, 'The cost to the Order in calling such a quest
would be very great. We should consider this as we vote.'
  So saying, Lord Ciceron called for the College of Lords to
decide Danlo's petition. Danlo was not surprised to see that
only three lords raised their hands in favour of trying to cure
the plague virus. All the others voted no.
  'We're sorry our decision must be thus,' Lord Ciceron said
to Danlo. 'But perhaps your Alaloi will still survive. It may
be many years – or, we sincerely pray, never – before this
unpredictable virus explodes into its active state.'
  'Ah,' Bardo whispered to himself, 'ah, do you really care?'
  Lord Ciceron took no notice of Bardo, but instead smiled
weakly in Danlo's direction. 'And now there is one more matter
to dispose of before you are dismissed. We all know that there
are questions that the Master of Novices should have asked
concerning the death of the novice Pedar Sadi Sanat. We would
like to ask you these questions now. Young Novice. If your
answers are satisfactory, it may be
419
that we won't have to call for an akashic's inquest. Is this
agreeable to you?'
  Danlo looked quickly at Bardo, then said, 'Yes ... it is
agreeable.'
  'Very well,' Lord Ciceron said. He dropped his voice and
turned to consult with the three other Lords of the Tetrad for
a moment. Then I shall ask you the first questions.'
 While Lord Ciceron cleared his throat to ask his questions,
Lord Pall turned his head to look at Danlo. He stared at Danlo
intensely, and Danlo remembered that the cetics supposedly
could read the truth or falsity of a man's utterances in the
way he said his words. He remembered, too, that during one,
endless, unforgettable moment in the library the warrior-poet
had claimed to read the truth from Hanuman's tortured face.
  'I must ask the Young Novice,' Lord Ciceron said, 'if
Hanuman li Tosh ever threatened the novice Pedar's life?'
Danlo closed his eyes for a moment, then said, 'No.'
'Did you ever threaten to kill Pedar?'
'No.'
'Did you kill Pedar?'
 As Danlo drew in a breath of air, he could almost feel Lord
Pall's eyes burning like lasers into his face. All the lords of
the College of Lords, he saw, were looking at him, too.
  'Did you cause Pedar Sadi Sanat to fall from the stairs?'
Lord Ciceron repeated.
 'I ... may have,' Danlo said.
  From a hundred of the lords, almost at once, there was a
lowing sound and low hiss of voices, men and women shaking
their heads. Next to Danlo, still kneeling on their carpet,
Bardo looked at him in disbelief.
'Please tell us how you killed him.'
 'I ... imagined him dead.'
'What?'
  'With the eye of my mind,' Danlo said, 'I saw him dead upon
the stairs.'
420
  Lord Ciceron waved his hand in annoyance. 'But did you push
Pedar? Did you serve him any food or drink that day? Did you
dissolve any drug in his wine?'
'No.'
'Did you physically cause him to fall from the stairs?'
  'I wished him harm. I wished him to die. I ... willed this
to happen.'
'And that is all?'
'Isn't that enough?'
  Lord Ciceron traded glances with Lord Pall. Danlo saw Lord
Pall lift his index finger, slightly. Lord Ciceron sucked at
his blackened teeth and said, 'Anyone who had to submit to a
boy such as Pedar might have imagined his death. We do not
blame you for thinking what you thought. We can see that you
are not to blame for what happened to Pedar.'
'Ah,' Bardo muttered softly, 'this is really enough.'
 Apparently Lord Ciceron did not hear him say this, for he
pointed his skinny finger at Danlo and continued, 'At least,
we cannot blame you for causing his death directly. But is it
possible that someone else might have caused his death on your
behalf? Are you listening, Young Novice? Is it possible that
Hanuman li Tosh killed Pedar?'
'No,' Danlo said. 'I cannot believe ... that he did.'
  And then Danlo looked up at the starlit dome above him, and
he became aware of a deeper thought: I will not believe this of
Hanuman.
  'But what is it that you know, Young Novice? Do you know if
he killed Pedar?'
  Danlo was silent for a moment, and then he said, 'No.'
 'But do you know if Hanuman li Tosh was in his bed when– '
  'By God, this is too much!' Bardo suddenly cried out. He
struggled to his feet, and his face was full of blood and rage.
He shook his huge fist at Lord Ciceron. Too goddamned much!
You've asked him enough questions –
421
 isn't it enough you've condemned his people to die? What's
wrong with you? You're the filthy murderer, not him!'
  'Be silent!' Lord Ciceron ordered. He pointed a long finger
at Bardo. 'Kneel down, Pilot!'
 'You be silent,' Bardo said, 'or I'll slap your face until
your lips swell shut.'
'What did you say?'
'Your face, be silent.'
'My face!'
  Bardo stood drunkenly on his massive legs and bellowed, 'You
have the face of a barbaric merchant-pilot, not of a pilot of
the Order!'
  'I'm the Lord Pilot of the Order, and you've taken a vow of
obedience!'
 'By God, I should have been Lord Pilot, not you! Then I'd be
reminding you that it's a pilot's duty and glory to seek
impossible things, even such as a cure for this damned virus.'
'If you don't kneel immediately– '
  'And I'd remind you that a Lord Pilot is to be an exemplar
and teacher of novices, not their inquisitor.'
 Lord Ciceron's hand and finger were now trembling, whether
from fear or anger, Danlo couldn't tell. His smooth old voice,
then, grew calm and full of deceit; it seemed he was trying to
provoke Bardo to some disastrous action. 'But I'm the Lord
Pilot, after all, and you are Master of Novices. I believe that
the elevation – or the debasement – of the Master of Novices
can fairly be called an administrative decision, and lies thus
well within the duties of the Tetrad,' he bowed to the other
three lords sitting at his table and smiled.
  'Ah, but Mallory Ringess, before he left Neverness, made me,
Bardo, Master of Novices. The Ringess, himself, did this.'
 'And we four lords,' Chanoth Chen Ciceron said, 'may unmake
the more foolish of his elevations. Your friend
422
 betrayed you when he raised you to a position beyond your
abilities. And then betrayed the Order by leaving the City and
leaving you to brutalize the novices.'
'By God, I think I will slap your face!'
  Bardo made a move toward Lord Ciceron, but just then Danlo,
still kneeling rigidly, reached out and grabbed Bardo's wrist.
He clenched his fingers as he would around a spear shaft,
feeling the power of the great, swollen muscles running along
Bardo's forearm. Although Danlo was very strong, with hands
hardened by a lifetime of work outside in the cold, he was not
quite a fully grown man, and he could feel that Bardo easily
could have broken away. Something in his grip, however, must
have restrained Bardo. He looked down at Danlo, belched, and
then smiled. 'Please let go,' he said softly.
 It must have been clear to most of the lords that Bardo,
purple-faced and bellowing like a musk ox, posed an immediate,
physical threat to their persons. One of them, the Lord
Imprimatur, sent the novice to summon the roving journeymen who
policed the Academy. Other lords – and Chanoth Chen Ciceron was
one of these – shrank back in their chairs and tried not to
look Bardo eye to eye. In truth, it was the duty of all lords
present to rise up and swarm Bardo, to subdue, restrain and
chastise him for breaking his vow of obedience. This was the
way of the Order. All of the lords, in their time as
journeymen, had enforced the Order's canons and codes. It
remained their duty to do so, but many of the lords were old,
and it had been many years since they had touched another human
being in violence. Only Lord Vasquez and Lord Nikolos, of the
Tetrad, arose from their chairs to discipline Bardo. Rodrigo
Diaz and a few other lords joined them, but all the others
remained at their places.
  'Wait,' Chanoth Chen Ciceron said. He had finally gathered
up his courage. He stood and pushed his way to the front of the
lords as they advanced on Bardo.
'Ah, piss on you,' Bardo muttered.
423
  'You are no longer Master of Novices!' Lord Ciceron shouted.
 'Piss on you!' Bardo roared out. And then he did an
astonishing thing, unprecedented in all the Order's astonishing
three-thousand-year history. He pulled loose from Danlo and
opened the zipper at the front of his pantaloons. He removed
his membrum. It was a huge tube of flesh, truly the longest and
thickest membrum Danlo had ever seen attached to the loins of a
human being. It was half-engorged and purple, like the membrum
of a shagshay bull. In his huge fingers Bardo held this
astonishing-looking appendage as he began to piss on the floor.
Then he aimed the dark yellow stream at Chanoth Chen Ciceron
and laughed as the Lord Pilot jumped back, nearly tripping over
his own legs. Bardo whipped the stream of his piss back and
forth in zig-zags, keeping the other lords at bay, and for a
long time he continued to laugh his deep-bellied laugh. That
night he had drunk much beer and was as full of water as an
ocean. Danlo marvelled at the huge man's capaciousness. He
watched as Bardo's piss flowed in rivulets over the black floor
tiles and began discolouring the Fravashi carpet. The piss was
deep amber, almost orange, and it stank of sugars and goatroot.
Even though Danlo saw it would only be a matter of moments – or
ounces – before the piss soaked through the carpet beneath his
knees, he remained kneeling politely.
 'Stand back now!' Bardo called out to the lords. 'Stay away!'
 Despite the utter ludicrousness of the moment – perhaps
because of its absurdity – Danlo couldn't help thinking of how
his near-brothers and – sisters of the Devaki had lost their
bladder tone and tightness in the time before death. His eyes
burned with tears, and he watched Bardo waggle his membrum back
and forth, and suddenly he was laughing, simultaneously
laughing and weeping at the fundamental absurdity of life.
'By God, I'm almost done!' Bardo said. 'Stand back,
424
 there's no need any longer for you to chastise me, I'm done,
do you understand? Done with you barbarians and old fools, done
with the Order.'
 His words fell like thunder through the chamber. For a moment
nobody moved. Then Bardo, neglecting to shake himself dry,
zipped up the pantaloons of his robe and pulled the great black
ring off his end finger. He held up his pilot's ring for
everyone to see. 'With this ring, eighteen years ago, I took my
pilot's vows. I now abjure them. Piss on the Order! Piss on all
of you!'
  So saying, he drew back his arm, and with terrific force,
hurled the ring against a nearby pillar. The ring, made of
diamond and stived with a unique signature of flaws, shattered.
The sound of it breaking into pieces was terrible to hear.
Danlo stared at the diamond shards glittering darkly against
the black floor; he had always thought that the splendid
pilots' rings were unbreakable.
  'Farewell.' Bardo smiled at Danlo, reached down and laid his
hand atop his head. Then he bowed to the lords, turned, and
with surprising grace considering his huge mass and drunken
state, sashayed across the chamber and out of the double doors.
  Soon after this, Chanoth Chen Ciceron restored the
convocation to order. He called for novices to clean up Bardo's
strong-smelling emission. A new carpet was brought for Danlo to
kneel on, and the stunned lords returned to their seats. And
then, for a brief time, they continued to question Danlo. They
asked him if he had ever heard Hanuman blaspheme against the
god of the Architects, Nikolos Daru Ede; they asked him about
Hanuman's reasons for coming to Neverness, and in slightly
awestruck voices, they asked him why (and how) he had taken
Hanuman's place as a would-be sufferer of the warrior-poet's
tortures. When he had finished speaking, the lords conferred
among themselves. Danlo knelt on his carpet listening as Lord
Kutikoff proposed banishing all warrior-poets from the City, or
at least forbidding any more of them to immigrate. Then Lord
425
 Vasquez observed that they should be glad that Bardo had
abandoned the Order; his self-banishment, she said, should
satisfy the harijan elders and put an end to the problems
created when Pedar had taken his unfortunate – and accidental –
fall. And as for Hanuman li Tosh, the lords absolved him of all
blame.
   'We are sorry,' Lord Ciceron said to Danlo. 'We are sorry
that the cold light of suspicion fell upon you and Hanuman. But
obviously, Pedar's fall was as it seemed – a tragic accident.
Obviously, neither you nor Hanuman are murderers. You are both
fine young novices, and your courage in facing the warrior-poet
was outstanding. We shall be happy to welcome you as pilots
when the day comes that you take your vows.'
  So ended the 'harijan problem' and the minor concerns of the
lords of Neverness. Danlo was dismissed then, and he left the
Lords' College the same way he had entered it. When he moved
out into the frigid morning air, he immediately saw Bardo
leaning against a cold flame column at the bottom of the steps.
Although the Academy buildings were golden in the day's first
light, the flame globes were still afire, bathing Bardo in soft
colours. His face shone with indigo, violet and puce; his hand
was thrown over his eye and the band of skin around his finger,
where his pilot's ring used to be, gleamed like phosphorescent
ivory. As Danlo descended the steps, he heard the huge, sad man
addressing himself: 'Ah, Bardo, what have you done? It's over
now, it is done, too bad.'
   'Are you all right?' Danlo called out. At the sound of his
voice, Bardo started and looked up at him. 'Bardo, Bardo
- I am sorry.'
   'Little Fellow, I'm sorry, I've failed you. But did you see
the faces of those old lords? They won't forget this day, not
even if they live three more lifetimes.'
  'I will not forget... either,' Danlo said, and he drew up
close to Bardo.
426
  'Nor I. The last day of Bardo's life in which he tasted
beer.'
'What?'
   'I, Bardo – after today, I'll never drink beer again, I
promise you, Little Fellow. When I'm old, I'll look back on
this day and say, "Here lies the great divide of my life.
Before, Bardo was weak, a coward and a drunkard. And afterward
– ever after, I promise – a man of purpose, truth, and fate".'
'But what will you do?'
  'What will I do? What will I not do. I will do something
extreme. Something outrageous which will one day be called
great. Ah, Little Fellow, as I look into your flawless eyes,
even as I stand here blathering away, an idea is coming into
this great, fat brain of mine. I will do something which will
make all the Lords of the Order wake up and say, "We should
have seen Bardo for what he truly is and listened to him when
we had the chance."'
'Will you leave Neverness?'
  'Perhaps. Perhaps not. Let us not discuss what I will do.
The question of the moment is: what will you do?'
  Danlo looked off into the Shih Grove below him. In the
morning wind, the pretty silver trees were rippling like water.
'I should leave the Order, too,' he said.
'No, no, that is precisely what you must not do.'
'Why not?'
 'You must become a pilot. Your father, before you, was a
pilot, and you must be too.'
'Why?'
  'Because there will be a second mission to the Vild.
Someday. It will take five or ten years to organize, but there
will be a mission. Ah, a great mission to the Architects of the
Old Church. It was the goddamned Architects who created the
plague, and it's said they know of a cure.'
  The sky above Danlo was a blue-black dome, but in the east,
where the sun was now rising, the ridgelines of the mountains
glowed a deep crimson. He whispered a silent
427
 prayer to the sun, and then asked, Truly? A cure ... how do
you know this?'
 Bardo belched, let out a huff of steam, and then thrust his
hands beneath his armpits to keep them warm. He said, 'Once,
when I was a young pilot, when the Timekeeper called his quest,
I journeyed to Ksandaria. It's a dull, unenlightened place,
devoid of skilled women, good food or beer, but the Ksandarian
encyclopaedists keep the best library in the Civilized Worlds.
And I penetrated it! Deep, deep, Little Fellow, deep into their
inner sanctum where they keep their forbidden pools of
knowledge. By happenstance – by pure good luck, as I admit – I
learned almost everything there is to know about ancient
religions and secret orders. And cults, sects and bizarre
theologies. Ah, you wouldn't believe the lunacies people
believe. So many, so many. And, while I admit that I have my
failings, a poor memory is not an affliction I suffer. And the
things I remember! I remember kithing a secret deposition made
by a man named Sharanth Li Chu who was an underling of Edmond
Jaspari. You've heard of Jaspari, this so-called "God's
Architect" of the Cybernetic Universal Church? The high priest
of the goddamned Architects. Well, as I was saying, Li Chu
deposed that Edmond Jaspari ordered the engineering of the
plague virus. This was in 1750, Neverness time, during the
second year of the War of the Faces. The Old Church was losing
the war and the Architects were desperate. And so they
solicited the warrior-poets to create the god-cursed virus. But
it mutated, of course, and nearly obliterated the Old Church –
along with three quarters of humanity. Everyone knows this. It
was Li Chu's claim, however, that Jaspari's engineers designed
an inhibiting drug that could keep the virus dormant. The drug
– if one believes Li Chu – was given to every surviving
Architect. It enabled them to live, even though few of them
would have inherited the so-called suppressor genes that
protect the rest of us. Think of the Architects of the Old
Church as a population as genetically distinct – and
428
 vulnerable – as the Alaloi. It's probable that they still must
use this drug, to this day.'
  As Bardo's basso voice died into the deeper sounds of the
morning, Danlo did a curious thing. With his wrists together,
fingers closed and pointing downward, he raised his arms toward
the sky. He bowed his head to the sun. Then, having completed
this most basic of daily Alaloi rituals, he jumped up three
steps, smiled and jumped down again. And then back up. 'But,
Bardo, if you knew ... this history, why didn't you tell the
lords?'
 'There are three reasons,' Bardo said. 'Firstly, it will be
at least five years before the Vild mission is organized,
another five before the first pilots return to Neverness. The
Alaloi – I am loath to have to say this – could well be dead
before then. Secondly, the Order, as I conceive it, as I used
to conceive it, when I cared, the Order shouldn't have to go
begging the barbaric Architects for a cure to this disease when
it's possible our splicers could duplicate Jaspari's inhibiting
drug. And thirdly, well
'Yes?'
 'The third reason I kept this from the stupid lords is that
they wouldn't have believed me. I who have told untruths only
once or twice in my life. Chanoth Chen Ciceron, in his slippery
way would have called me a liar. And then what would be left
for me to do? Murder? Could I have killed him, as I should have
done in the war when I had the chance? No, no, that's
impossible, I couldn't even slap his barbaric old face, too
bad.'
  For a long time Bardo talked to Danlo, persuading him that
if he wanted to help the Alaloi, he should become a pilot, and
hence be selected for the second mission to the Vild. 'It will
be your best chance,' Bardo said. The Order, I think, will
divide in two, and the best pilots will go to the Vild. Maybe
I'll build a lightship and go too.'
  Danlo kicked at the icy steps and said, 'I am sorry ... I
have caused you much sorrow.'
'You? No, no, it's not your fault. I was finished as Master
429
 of Novices before we ever entered the Lords' College. Lord
Ciceron has been waiting years for this chance.'
'I am sorry,' Danlo said.
 'Well, I'm sorry, too. Who will watch over my girls and boys
now? You and Hanuman – especially Hanuman. He hasn't been
himself since Pedar's accident.'
'No.'
  'Ah, he's too damn sensitive. I think he can't bear the
thought of death – anyone's death, even such a miserable boy as
Pedar.'
'I think you are right,' Danlo said.
  'And now this barbarous affair with the warrior-poet. Too
bad.'
'He still suffers ... because of the ekkana drug, yes?'
 Bardo nodded his head. 'Please take care of him while I'm
gone, Danlo. He has a hundred admirers, but I think you and I
are the only ones who understand him.'
 'I will always ... be his friend.'
  'Ah, nothing's harder than true friendship, as I should
know.' Bardo spread out his cloak and rubbed his hands
together. 'Don't give up hope, Little Fellow. These are strange
times – anything can happen. Do you still have the ring I gave
you?'
Danlo held his hand over his chest and nodded his head.
 'Good. Please keep this ring in case your father returns.
Someday he'll return, by God. Someday.'
  Bardo embraced Danlo, and he made ready to leave. He patted
his belly, belched, then said, 'Well, then, I'm off to the
cafes. I'm going to drink twenty glasses of beer and become
gloriously drunk – it's a glorious day, don't you think?'
 'But ... Bardo,' Danlo said. 'I thought you just abjured
drinking beer.'
  'Did I? No, no, I did not. I said that after this day, I'd
drink no more beer. Well, the day's not over yet, is it? By
God, it's hardly begun!'
 So saying, he bowed deeply to Danlo and then ambled
 430
down to the gliddery and snapped in his skate blades. The sight
of Bardo fumbling about drunkenly might have moved Danlo to
despair but strangely, at that moment, he felt nothing but
hope.
'Goodbye, Bardo!' he shouted.
 He watched Bardo disappear down the street, and then he
turned toward Perilous Hall where the other boys would be
waiting for the news of what had occurred in the College of the
Lords.
431



CHAPTER FOURTEEN

A Game of Hokkee
 The man of knowledge must not only love his enemies; he also
be able to hate his friends.
 – Friedrich the Hammer

Danlo spent much of the next few days wandering around the
Academy grounds, lost in an ice-fog of brooding and deep
reflection. He did no work. He restrained his impulse to go to
the library, to enter the cybernetic spaces in search of some
certain knowledge or episteme which might help him think more
clearly about the Alaloi's fate. Nor did he visit his tutor,
nor take meals with his friends. One bright, cold afternoon
however, on the 77th, he remembered that his hallmates were
scheduled to skate against the first year novices of Stone Row
in a game of hokkee. And so he returned to Perilous Hall,
donned a kamelaika, snapped his hokkee blades into his boots,
grabbed his mallet and he hurried across Borja to the Ice Dome.
 In truth, it was not a good day for hokkee. The news of
Bardo's abjuration had stunned most of the other boys and they
seemed more interested in talking about this scandal than in
slapping a hard wooden puck across a hundred and fifty yards of
ice. It was now certain that Bardo would be leaving the City,
perhaps for good. Madhava li Shing and Sherborn of Darkmoon –
and others – pestered Danlo with questions concerning Bardo's
plans. And then, just before the first chukka of the game,
Hanuman li Tosh appeared at the far end of the huge arena. He
made his way between the empty sled courts and the five
icefields
432
laid out in perfect, white rectangles at the Dome's centre. He
skated up to Danlo and to his hallmates, whom he had not seen
in many days. Only half an hour earlier the cetics had finally
let him leave their tower, and he had come straightaway to the
Ice Dome. Hanuman loved playing hokkee, Danlo remembered,
almost as much as he loved the precise movements of his killing
art.
  'Hello, Madhava; hello, Lorenzo; hello, Ivar; hello,
Alesar.' Hanuman greeted the boys of Perilous Hall and they
swarmed around him, bowing and congratulating him on his
miraculous escape from death in the library. Then Hanuman broke
free and came up to Danlo, who was standing alone near the edge
of the field. He looked at him for a long moment before saying,
'Hello, Danlo – it's good to see that you're well.'
'And you, Hanu – are you well? Is there still much pain?'
  Hanuman laughed softly, strangely and said, 'Didn't you once
tell me that pain is the awareness of life?'
  'Yes, but that was before I had seen ... what the ekkana
drug can do.'
 'Well, pain is always pain,' Hanuman said. 'But there are
ways to control it.'
 'I have heard ... that many people have died from the
ekkana.'
 'But as you can see, I'm still alive. I owe you my life.
Again,' he said this clearly, coldly, but then, seeing the hurt
he was causing Danlo, he forced a smile and told him, 'You
always amaze me. You faced the poet of your own will – not even
my mother would have done what you did.'
 Danlo touched the scar above his eye and said, 'Everyone
speaks of this as if I had a choice.'
'But you did. You might have run away.'
'You know ... that I could not run away.'
  'Oh, yes, I do know,' Hanuman said. He looked at Danlo and
tried to smile, but something was obviously disturbing him.
'It's a miracle that you remembered the poem. There
433
was a moment – I thought you wouldn't remember it, but you did.
Didn't you? Of course you did. With your impossible memory that
I shall never fathom, you remembered the poem. Which is why the
poet put the knife in his eye and we're still alive to talk
about it.'
 While the twenty novices from Stone Row at last filed into
the Dome and took their places on the opposite side of the
field, Hanuman and Danlo stood talking about what had occurred
in the library, and after, when the College of Lords had denied
Danlo's petition. They spoke together easily, but there was a
distance between them which had not been there before. Danlo
wanted to know more about the healing arts of the cetics, but
Hanuman was reluctant to reveal what had happened during the
days that he had spent in their cold, isolated tower. Danlo
asked him other questions as well, little questions concerning
the sharpness of Hanuman's skate blades or their strategy for
the day's game. Because of Hanuman's secret suffering and his
coolness, however, Danlo avoided the deeper questions that he
might have asked. In truth, there was only one question that he
wanted to ask, but as friends often do, he found himself
talking about everything other than this one crucial thing. And
then one of the novices from Stone Row called for the game to
begin. Much to Danlo's dismay, Hanuman used the excitement of
the game – the flashing steel, the fear and frenzy of young
bodies tearing across the ice – as a kind of shield against
Danlo's concerns. Little by little, Hanuman fell reticent, and
then silent. Through five chukkas of skating, he kept this
awkward, hurtful silence, and he kept himself apart from Danlo.
Although he played his usual lightning-fast game and wielded
his black shatterwood mallet with both mindfulness and
savagery, he seemed to care little about winning. And all the
while, in his aloof posture and in his pale eyes, in the way he
looked at Danlo (or looked away from him) his manner was full
of anguish and despair.
'Why are you ... so inward today?' Danlo finally asked
434
 as they rested before the sixth and final chukka. They were
sitting together near the end of a long shiny bench, which had
been painted blue earlier that season. Some of their hallmates,
at the opposite end of the bench, sat slumped over their knees.
Others stood about gasping for breath, or spitting blood, or
talking, or fingering crude signs at the Stone Row novices
across the ice field seventy yards away. Through the fog
steaming off the ice, Danlo could see the opposing team, twenty
loud-faced boys, each of them kicking their boots against their
red bench and holding erect two fingers. This was a sign –
depending on how interpreted – that either there was some doubt
as to Danlo's hallmates having been born of real wombs in the
natural manner, or that they were losing by two goals.
Certainly, Danlo thought, they were losing by two goals. His
own skating for most of the game had been distracted, erratic,
mechanical. He and Hanuman usually scored most of Perilous
Hall's goals, but between them that afternoon there had been no
halla, no interplay of thought and act. Hanuman was as cold as
the white ice of the polo field, while Danlo was haunted by the
memory of murder and death.
  'In some ways you're more inward than I,' Hanuman said.
 'That may be true ... but neither of us was meant for
inwardness.'
 Hanuman looked up and squinted at the light streaming through
the Dome's thousands of triangular window panes. 'How do you
know what I was meant for?'
  'Ever since Pedar fell down the steps,' Danlo said, evading
his question, 'you have fallen in on yourself. Why? You hated
him ... almost as much as I did.'
 Hanuman, still staring up at the Dome, closed his eyes and
winced, as if in pain. He said, 'Because he's dead. Isn't that
enough? How do you think you seem now that you've discovered
the fate of the Alaloi tribes?'
'But they are my people!'
'I'm sorry, Danlo. Perhaps a cure for the plague will be
435
 found. Perhaps you'll even find it. But even if you do, we're
all dead, aren't we? Eventually. All people, living their
lives so quickly – and why?'
 Here Hanuman looked at Danlo and quoted one of the passages
in the Book of God which Nikolos Daru Ede had plagiarized from
an ancient body of mystic writings, the False Bhagavad Gita:
'The world of the living burns the flesh, and all creatures
rush to their destruction like moths into aflame.'
'You think about death too much,' Danlo said.
'I?'
 'There is no cure for it. Death is a disease ... that has no
cure.'
 'The Cybernetic Churches,' Hanuman said, 'teach otherwise.'
  Danlo touched Ahira's feather and said, 'Even if it were
possible, I would not want myself, my soul – my purusha –
carked into a computer.'
  'But there are other ways. There is the path godward that
your father chose. Bardo used to talk about this all the time.
Once he said that anyone who was willing to suffer as the
Ringess did could become a god.'
'Bardo ... liked to talk to you, yes?'
  'Especially when he was drunk. He took an interest in my
career – he always insisted I should become a pilot.'
'You will be the most blessed of pilots,' Danlo said.
 'Do you think so? I'm not so sure. Yesterday the Lord Cetic
invited me to have tea with him in the tower. He suggested I
should apply to Lara Sig and learn the cetic arts.'
'The Lord Cetic!'
'You seem surprised.'
'But you must not become a cetic!'
'And why mustn't I?'
'Because ... cetics are too inward,' Danlo explained.
'Once again we're arguing in circles.'
 'Cetics are ... too withdrawn from life,' Danlo said. Due to
a collision with someone's mallet during the fourth
436
 chukka, his chin was slightly cut; he wiped the blood away
with the sleeve of his kamelaika, which left a long red streak
against the clean wool. 'Cetics,' he said, 'seek the truth
about consciousness, yes, and I understand this attracts many
novices. Samadhi and fugue and simultaneity, all the states of
computer consciousness. But you cannot know ... about real
consciousness by facing a computer.'
 It was almost time for the sixth chukka, and Danlo's
hallmates were busy sharpening their skates and wrapping their
mallets with black tape, not because their blades were really
dull or the shatterwood shafts needed reinforcing, but because
this was a game-ending ritual almost as old as Perilous Hall
itself. The air whined with the sound of diamond files cutting
across steel, and Hanuman raised his voice, saying, 'But
there's more to the cetic arts than facing a computer.'
 Someone handed Danlo a roll of sticky black tape, and he used
his strong white teeth to bite off a piece. He said, There is
mastery, yes? Mastery over the mind; mastery over others'
minds.'
 'There are dangers, I know,' Hanuman said. 'Which is why, of
all the Order, the cetic vows are the strictest. "Cetic ethics"
and all that.'
 'But the cetics are hermetics,' Danlo said, supplying a
saying commonly bandied about the Academy. They are mystics who
keep secrets ... about the mastery of consciousness.'
  'But this is part of their ethics. Most people, if shown the
secrets of their consciousness – they're like children playing
with hydrogen bombs.'
 'Hanu, Hanu, this is just what I am afraid of.'
 'You're afraid of me?'
 'I am afraid for you.'
 Hanuman finished taping his mallet and said, 'Is that true?'
 'Have you seen the master cetics?' Danlo asked. 'Have
 437
 you looked at their faces? The old ones? I have ... three days
ago, in the Lords' College. The Lord Cetic. Lord Pall. He is
like the others. He is corrupt and horrible, too conscious ...
of himself. He is mad, I think, barely human. Do not become a
cetic, Hanu.'
 'Most cetics live too long,' Hanuman said. 'Probably it's my
fate to die young – but even if I don't, I'll never grow old
like that.'
  Danlo looked at his best friend and said, softly, 'But there
are other reasons for not becoming.... Why do you think Lord
Pall wants you to apply to the cetics?'
  'Well, the cetics and pilots are always competing for the
best novices. I'm sure the Lord Cetic will invite you to tea
before the year's end, too.'
'But I could never become a cetic!' Danlo said.
'No?'
  'No.' Danlo ejected the blades from his boots and ran his
thumbnail across the edges. With a file that Madhava tossed to
him, he began sharpening them. 'Before I entered the Academy I
was ... involved with the Returnists. And the autists. These
sects and religions – the cetics. This makes for a dangerous
combination, yes?'
  'Which is why cetics are forbidden any kind of religiosity.'
'Then you have no interest in the new religions?'
'No, none.'
  Danlo looked down at the ice around the bench. In its milky
smoothness, he caught sight of Hanuman's reflection. Something
about this ghostlike image, so delicate and pale, hinted at a
secret passion. It was as if the ice, in distorting the clean
lines of Hanuman's face, were acting as a lens to a deeper,
truer self. There was an intensity and devoutness in his
friend's pale blue eyes; for the first time, he could see that
Hanuman burned with an intense religiousness. Never mind the
boy's scorn of the Cybernetic Universal Church, the hatred and
ridicule of his parents' faith which had informed his
childhood; never mind that
438

 he had often referred to Edeism as the 'slave religion'. The
real problem, Danlo thought, was that Edeism and other
religions, for one such as Hanuman, were not really religious
enough.
  'It is known that the cetics, some of them, practise almost
continual interface with their computers,' Danlo said. He
looked up from the ice at Hanuman, and continued speaking in a
clear, pained voice. 'In violation of the canons ... and the
law of Civilization. You have heard this, yes?'
 'If one believes the rumours, there's a grade of
cyber-shamans called neurosingers who misuse their computers –
I think this is true.'
'And they seek interface ... with the godspace, yes?'
  'Perhaps they do, Danlo. Who knows what the neurosingers
seek?'
'But what do you seek?'
'I don't really know.'
  Danlo, glimpsing the light that came into Hanuman's eyes as
he said this, thought that he knew precisely what he sought.
'Have you decided to become a cetic, then?'
'Possibly,' Hanuman said.
'But we were to be pilots together!'
'You'll be the pilot – it's what you were born for.'
'But to journey to the stars –'
 'I'm sorry, but these last days I've lost any desire to see
the stars.'
'But a cetic? No, that would be so wrong ... for you.'
'How do you know what's wrong?'
'I can see it. Anybody could.'
 'You can see it,' Hanuman said, and he rammed a diamond file
back and forth across his skate blade. 'You're a scryer, then,
and you can see it.'
'Why are you so angry?' Danlo asked
'You think I'm angry?'
'Truly, you are angry, your face– '
  'Why should you always have to tell the truth? To try to see
it? Can't you ever lie, a little?'
439
'I do not want to see you ... become a cetic.'
'Perhaps it's my fate,' Hanuman said.
'Your fate?'
'I should love my fate – isn't this what you like to say?'
'But you cannot know your fate!' Danlo said.
  'Well, I know I've decided to become a cetic. Just now
–thank you for helping me decide.'
'No, you must not become a cetic.'
'I shall, however, become one. I'm sorry.'
'But, Hanu, why?'
  They sat staring at each other as they had done on the day
of their meeting, in Lavi Square; neither of them wanted to be
the first to break eyelock. Then Madhava li Shing called out
that it was time to play the sixth chukka, and Danlo and
Hanuman – and the eighteen other boys from Perilous Hall –
skated out onto the polo field. With much chatter, grinding
skates and scurfed-up patches of ice, they took their places
behind their goal line. Up ice, at the field's exact centre,
someone had placed the polo puck inside a small violet circle.
All faces were now turned toward this puck, Danlo's and his
hallmates', and, behind their own goal line, the tense faces of
the Stone Row novices at the field's upper end. The boys fell
quiet, their hands gripping the shafts of their mallets. From
other parts of the Dome, from the sled courts and figure rings,
came the slicing softness of steel over ice; but when Madhava
gave the signal for the face-off, these little sounds were
obliterated by the moment's tumult: mallets being slapped
against the ice, whoops of exhilaration and relief, clacking
skates, and breath exploding from the lips of the boys all
around Danlo. The two teams raced together, up ice and down,
toward the puck at the centre of the field. Danlo and Hanuman,
who were the fastest of the Perilous Hall novices, were the
first to reach it. Almost immediately, however, three Stone Row
skaters blocked them and as the teams came crashing together
there was a flurry of mallets, skates flailing, shouts and boys
crying out in pain.
440
 Danlo managed to break out of the mêlée, using his mallet
blade to smoothly guide the puck up ice. And then he passed the
puck to Hanuman. The strategy of the Perilous Hall novices
called for him to skate as right point while Hanuman took the
left point. Because they had been unable to co-ordinate their
attack, however, for most of the game Madhava (who was stroking
desperately ten yards behind Danlo), Alesar Roth and others had
taken on the brunt of the offence. But now a curious thing
happened. Ahead of Danlo, to his left, Hanuman was trying to
break free from a swarm of Stone Row skaters. Danlo became
aware of him, not just with his eyes, but with a finer, truer
organ of perception, as if his sense of life were seeking out
across the ice to find his friend's secret fire. And Hanuman,
who burned bright as any star, was seeking him; Danlo could
feel it in Hanuman's flashing eyes, and in the angle of his
neck, and in the pattern of his furious mallet work, and in the
way his own heart beat to the rhythm of their pounding skates.
Something – perhaps their anger at each other or their fear
(and love) of fate – had renewed the connectedness between
them. They skated together up ice, and all the while an
invisible cord grew between them, a numinous tissue of kinship
connecting them belly to belly and mind to mind. In the
brilliance of this bond there was a mutual anticipation of act
and movement, intimations of the future as it unravelled moment
by moment. The ice flowed beneath Danlo like a gleaming sheet
of satin and through it he felt Hanuman's skate blades
striking, left foot and right, gliding and striking. The beat
of the steel rang out as separate and distinct from all the
other sounds around him: the mallets clacking together, the
groans, gasps of breath and Madhava's faraway, sing-song voice
calling out instructions to his hallmates. Just then Hanuman
found an opening. Danlo found it at the same instant, even
before Hanuman's mallet flicked out and slapped the puck
through. The puck, a circle of red jewood much dinged and
scarred, shot directly at Danlo, who whipped
441
 down his mallet blade to intercept it. Two novices wearing
the flowery seal of Stone Row on their kamelaikas immediately
bore down upon him. Danlo pulled sharply to his left even as
Hanuman pulled away from the skaters swarming him. Danlo
passed him the puck. As he accelerated up ice, a sudden wind
chilled his face, cutting his eyes, and there was a reddish
blur as Hanuman passed the puck back to him. Together, almost
in lock-step, they raced toward the Stone Row goal box,
passing the puck back and forth, like a corpuscle of blood,
back and forth. Among the Stone Row novices they dodged and
darted and their sense of space and time was uncanny. 'Hanu,
Hanu!' Danlo cried out in his mind as he passed the puck
again. Hanuman reached his mallet out, slowing the puck and
then, with a lightning stroke, he fired it across fifteen
yards of ice into the goal box. It was the first of the goals
they would make during the chukka.
 'Luck!' one of the Stone Row novices called out as he banged
his mallet against the ice in frustration. He was a
good-looking boy with reddish black skin and a look of pride
colouring his face. That was a lucky shot.'
  One of his hallmates held up his middle finger – knuckle
side facing outward – at Hanuman. 'We're still winning by one
goal,' he reminded him.
 Sherborn of Darkmoon, who was leaning against his mallet,
sweating and panting for breath, held up his own middle finger.
He said, 'One more goal is all we need to tie the score.'
Again, at the Stone Row novices circling about, he thrust his
finger into the air. 'And one more goal after that, you lose
the game.'
 The novices each returned to their goal lines then. The proud
boy from Stone Row – his name was Lais Motega Mohammad – called
the signal for the chukka's second face-off. Again the boys
rushed together pell-mell, converging on the puck as carrion
birds over a corpse. There was a frantic mêlée. The violence of
scything mallets, boots, and elbows flowed around Danlo, who
pursued the puck
442
 with glee and abandon. He had no care for himself. Of all the
boys he was the quickest and toughest, the most wild. This
wildness, many times during the past season, had caused him to
injure the other boys. And many times, he'd considered giving
up the game altogether. Once, after he'd caught a Lavi Hall boy
in the face with his mallet, breaking his jaw and knocking out
four bloody, splintered teeth, he despaired of ever wholly
honouring his vow of ahimsa. But he reasoned that ahimsa, as
Old Father taught the doctrine, required that he never harm
anyone intentionally. In truth, he hated harming others, and he
never did so if he could help it; it was only his recklessness
and love of intense motion that caused the novices (even those
from his own hall) to fear the boy they called Danlo the Wild.
As for himself, however, he had no fear. He sustained injuries
frequently and in the first moments of the mêlée, Lais Mohammad
scraped the end of his mallet across Danlo's eye. The pain of
it burned like fire; his eye immediately blurred with tears.
But he was used to pain and never minded it as much as the
civilized boys did. Pain is the awareness of life – this saying
was as near to him as the throbbing of his own heart, which he
could feel pounding up behind his eye. It was his way to become
his pain, to let it wash through him like the burning of ice
water. Half-blinded in pain, in the middle of a sea of flashing
mallets and skates, he found the puck and touched it along with
his mallet. All around him was the press of hard bodies, ice
grinding and cries of anger. He entered into this violent
stream of chaos roiling across the polo field. He let it sweep
him along. This was his genius and his strength, to become
himself a part of the chaos rather than resisting it or trying
to control it. He, who had spent his childhood in ice and wind,
called upon his animal senses to feel his way across the field,
and he skated with a rare and vital grace.
  Suddenly, he heard Hanuman cry out, 'Danlo!' In the tangle
of limbs near him, an opening appeared. He
 443
knocked the puck through, and Hanuman took it with his mallet,
and then the opening closed, as the sea closes in around a
stone. The mêlée's flow shifted away from Danlo, moving in a
swarm of bodies across the field. It engulfed Hanuman. Danlo
saw him skating at the centre of ten or twelve boys, trying to
break free.
 'Pass the puck!' Madhava shrilled out. 'Pass it now!'
 'Hanu, Hanu!' Danlo said as he pushed his skates against the
ice and ducked between two boys from Stone Row. He felt the
secret cord between Hanuman and him tighten, pulling him back
into the mêlée. There was a moment, he saw, when Hanuman might
have passed him the puck. 'Hanu, Hanu,' he whispered, but
Hanuman was intent on defending the puck from the Stone Row
novices' darting mallets. He was very good at defence. Where
some feared Danlo for his wildness, the novices of Borja's
dormitories were terrified of Hanuman because he skated with a
fury and a will to harm others. This was the logic of his life,
his tragedy and fate. With his malice and his mallet (or with
his fists and murderous aura when unarmed), he sought always to
keep a space about himself, an impenetrable sphere of violence
whose centre was himself. Thus he protected himself – and the
puck – from others, but in doing so he cut himself off from the
stream of the game as it flowed around him. From across twenty
yards of ice, Danlo watched him pass the puck to Madhava and
then artfully slice his mallet into the kneecap of a Stone Row
novice who had got too close. Hanuman made it seem an accident,
as if he couldn't check the force of his stroke. The Stone Row
novice fell to the ice then, grabbing at his knee, screaming,
shaking his head from side to side as his eyes streamed tears.
And on Hanuman's face there was a terrible look, a mask of fear
that Danlo had glimpsed at their first meeting. He was perhaps
the only one to see it. While some of novices skated over and
crowded around the screaming boy, Danlo stared at Hanuman's
face. With his eyes, and with a deeper sense of seeing for
which he as yet
444
 had no name, he became aware of the essential paradox of
Hanuman's existence: Hanuman was truly afraid of others, of the
hard icy otherness of all things outside his person and self.
This fear compelled him to cut himself off from life, as a
protection, and yet it was this very act of severance that made
him feel vulnerable and alone. And so he feared, and so he
hated, hated and harmed any who threatened him. When Lais
Mohammad drew himself up and pointed his mallet at him,
accusing him of cruelty and cowardice, Hanuman immediately used
his own mallet to knock it away. The force of the blow
deflected the mallet into the cheek of one of Lais Mohammad's
hallmates, a small boy with the eyes of a terrified shagshay
ewe. He bleated out in pain, and he flailed his mallet back and
forth in front of his face, striking Sherborn of Darkmoon in
the jowls around his neck. All at once, like a tidal wave
spreading out over the sea, the violence overwhelmed the boys
of Perilous Hall and Stone Row, and they flew at each other
with mallets and kicking boots and spit whipping out of their
mouths as they shouted and cursed and screamed. Danlo stroked
over and pushed his way into the brawl. He used his arms to
ward off blows, but he was careful not to skive any of the
fallen boys with his skate blades nor to deliver blows of his
own, even when striking out would have been the simplest way of
defending himself. The cord between him and Hanuman was now so
tight it seemed he could feel his friend's heart beating inside
his own chest. He came up close to Hanuman, almost close enough
to touch him. Then someone whacked Danlo's ear; a sour-faced
boy whose name he didn't know rammed the knob of his mallet
into his solar plexus. As Danlo pulled his elbows in toward his
belly, gasping for breath, he saw Hanuman strike the boy's
temple. The boy dropped to the ice as if his legs had been
chopped away. Perhaps he was dead, Danlo thought; the blow
might have killed anyone. And Hanuman was angry enough to kill,
Danlo could see it in his cold, mad eyes, in the way he singled
out his
445
victims and attacked them, with mallet and skate blades and a
will to annihilation. No one, of choice, would have stood
before him, but the crush of skaters was too thick for anyone
to flee. Just then Hanuman, with his uncanny sense of space,
found Lais Mohammad working his way behind him. He whirled
about and brought his mallet up. Mallet clacked against mallet
as the two boys tried to club each other. Lais Mohammad swung
his mallet blade at Hanuman's nose; no doubt he wanted to
shatter his bones, to ruin his fine, delicate face. He swung
his mallet, and Hanuman blocked it, his eyes pale with death.
  'Hanu, Hanu!' Danlo cried out and he threw himself across
the ice. To the boys struggling nearby, if any looked his way,
Hanuman's face must have seemed only a mask of fury, for he
attacked Lais Mohammad with lightning strokes, high and low,
exulting in the exercise of his killing art. But Danlo could
see that his friend's face, for all the hatred there, was
really frozen with fear. In fear, Hanuman drove his mallet
against Lais Mohammad's mallet, again and again, hacking as if
he were desperate to fell a tree, knocking and beating down
until the wood splintered suddenly and his mallet thwacked into
his enemy's chest. And with every stroke of his mallet, he
winced as if in pain, as if meting out such violence mutilated
his deepest self and caused him agony. It was this agony that
he feared. Above all things he feared the will to power over
himself, even as he loved it and called it his fate.
  Danlo came up between Lais Mohammad and Hanuman, then, and
he could feel the fear in the centre of his friend's belly,
rippling along the cord connecting them. He wrenched the mallet
from Hanuman's hands. And Lais Mohammad threw down his broken
mallet with a skidding clatter of wood, and grabbed another
from one of his hallmates and rained blows against Danlo's
back, cursing as he tried to get at Hanuman. Danlo fell against
Hanuman and bore him down, almost straight backwards, down with
a grunt and a slap against the hard, misty ice. He covered
446
 him with his body. Lais Mohammad's mallet cracked against
Danlo's spine, and the sudden, jumping agony of bruised nerves
and bone recalled the wounding of the deeper tissues of
Hanuman's soul.
 Pain is the awareness of life, Danlo remembered. In a single,
enduring moment of pain he became aware of the most fundamental
thing about Hanuman's life: his best friend, this pale fury
with whom he would be bonded until death, was by nature a
compassionate and gentle boy. But he had mutilated his own
nature. Or rather, he had tried to sear away and annihilate
this gentleness, much as one might murder an unwanted baby by
plunging it into a pool of lava. He did this with a will,
because he was possessed of a bold and furious will, a will to
overcome himself and be greater. And it was Danlo who had
excited the will to power in him, who had quickened it and made
it stronger. This is why he loved Danlo. He loved Danlo's
wildness, his vitality and grace, and above all, his
fearlessness of life. And yet he hated these very qualities
because he himself lacked them.
  All this Danlo saw in an instant, as he lay against Hanuman
belly to belly shielding him from Lais Mohammad's busy mallet.
And all the time Hanuman kicked out beneath him trying to heave
Danlo off, right leg and left, the staccato of his skate blades
against the ice exploding showers of snow and glittering chips,
and sending through its crystalline layers secret tremors of
rage and helplessness and hate. Hatred is the left hand of
love, Danlo remembered, and with this thought the whole course
of their future came to him in a wave of sudden inevitability,
although it would be years before he could articulate this
vision or see it clearly.
'Danlo, get off me!' Hanuman screamed.
  One of the Stone Row novices had come up behind Lais
Mohammad and was holding him, keeping him away from Danlo.
Slowly, Danlo stood up and faced Lais Mohammad. He said, 'I am
sorry.'
447
  'Get back!' Lais Mohammad shouted at Danlo. He was trying to
break free from the boy holding him. He twisted and grunted
and raised his mallet.
 Now Hanuman, too, was on his feet, shaking and furiously
searching the ice for his mallet. But Danlo looked at him and
said, 'Hanu, no!'
  For a moment, Hanuman froze, staring at Danlo. 'Hanu, Hanu,'
Danlo whispered. Lais Mohammad, too, looked at Danlo, and then
a gradual calm fell over the novices on the polo field. Danlo's
faithfulness to ahimsa – and his obvious love for his friend
(even one so feared as Hanuman li Tosh) – shamed and gentled
the boys of Stone Row and Perilous Hall. Many of them threw
down their mallets. From other parts of the Ice Dome came
novices, journeymen, and even four master akashics red-faced
and breathless from their game of skemmer on the sled courts.
One of these, Paloma the Elder, an old woman with a young face
and middling-old body, chided the boys for falling into
violence. She dismissed their respective protestations of
innocence and accusations of culpability, saying in a fussy old
voice, 'In violence, there's no beginning and no end, and
you're all to blame.' She saw to it that the injured were cared
for, their torn muscles rubbed with quickly absorbent enzymes,
their lacerations glued shut. A few of the boys had broken
bones or fractured teeth; Paloma sent these off to the cutter
for surgery and implanting. As it happened, the boy whom
Hanuman had clubbed in the head was not dead at all but merely
concussed. He bravely called for the game to continue. The boys
returned to their benches, then, to take a rest before
finishing the chukka.
  'Are you badly hurt?' Hanuman asked Danlo as they stood near
their hallmates' blue bench. The fury had gone out of him, and
he reached out to touch Danlo's sleeve. 'Do you need ice? Let's
see your back, get your kamelaika off.'
 When Danlo unzipped his kamelaika and pulled down the shirt,
a fire burned along his back: It felt as if someone
448
were using a hot knife to flay the flesh away from his muscles.
He hunched his shoulders over, resting his elbows on his knees.
In the middle of his spine, at least one of the vertebrae hurt
with a quick piercing pain every time he drew in a breath. His
back was a welter of broken skin, livid patches and streaks
upraised against ivory that would soon run to the blue and
black of deep bruises. He could not see these bruises, but he
felt them seaming him from buttocks to neck.
  'You do need ice,' Hanuman said. The other boys were passing
around a steel pail; inside it, thirty-one icicles clanged and
sloshed about. Hanuman took an icicle – a cylinder of water
frozen around a wooden stick – and he rubbed it up and down
over Danlo's back. 'Oh, Danlo,' he said, 'your vow of ahimsa
will get you killed one day.'
 'But I had to come between you!' Danlo said, and then he
ground his teeth together as Hanuman rubbed in a foul-smelling
ointment. 'He might have murdered you or ... you might have
murdered him.'
 'Do you really think I have that much courage?' Hanuman
asked.
  Having finished a task that obviously distressed him
–Hanuman always dreaded having to view or touch any sort of
wound – he glided over a few feet to the violet line marking
the edge of the polo field. With his skate blade, he kicked at
the ice, reaming and grinding the toe point into the hole he
made. His head was bowed, but his eyes were full of light.
  'Hanu, please,' Danlo said, coming over to him. There is a
thing I must ask you.'
  Hanuman looked up in both calmness and dread, but he said
nothing.
 'In the library, just before the warrior-poet killed himself,
he said a thing.' Danlo touched the sleeve of Hanuman's
kamelaika and told him, 'I cannot forget ... what the poet said
about Pedar.'
'And what did he say?'
449
'You do not remember?'
 Hanuman hesitated only a moment before answering, 'No, I
can't remember.'
'The poet said that you ... murdered Pedar.'
  'Murdered him? Do you really think I murdered him?'
 'I ... do not want to think that you did.'
'But how could I have murdered him?'
'I do not know.'
  Hanuman looked straight into Danlo's eyes, and then he did
an astonishing thing. He reached down and grasped Danlo's hand
as he had done in the library, and he squeezed with all his
strength, so powerfully and urgently that the bones of Danlo's
hand hurt with a sharp, almost breaking pain. Hanuman brought
his lips up close to Danlo's ear and whispered, The
warrior-poet was wrong. Or perhaps he lied. No one murdered
Pedar but himself.'
'In truth?'
'I promise you, Danlo.'
  As they clasped hands, Hanuman held himself still and tried
to smile. There was a vast comfort and sincerity in this smile,
but there was something else, too. Beneath the surface of
finely controlled muscles and easy emotions, like a boil deep
within the flesh, Hanuman's face was full of torment. He might
have cried out in agony at any moment if his need for
self-control were not so great.
  'I think that the cetics did not heal you, not... wholly,'
Danlo said. 'It is not just the ekkana drug, is it? I think it
must be something ... other.'
  Hanuman broke away from him and ground his skate blade
against the ice. 'You're too truthful – I've said that before.
You're too earnest, too curious, too ... too many things. You
don't care about yourself, do you? Your self. I don't have that
kind of courage – who does? The wildness, Danlo. When we first
met, and I saw it in you, in both of us, I thought I had the
courage for it. I don't. It will kill me, unless I kill it
first. Do you understand?'
450
  'Yes,' Danlo said. His body ached with a spreading
stiffness, and he suddenly felt cold. He closed his eyes,
remembering when he had first come to love the danger and the
wildness of his life; it had been during the cold night that he
and Soli had buried the Devaki people. Then, after a moment of
prayer and remembrance, to Hanuman, he whispered, 'No, I don't
want to understand.'
 Hanuman looked at him and quietly said, 'I don't have your
grace. The way you accept everything, even your own wildness.'
 'But I do not accept... everything. This is the problem with
life, for human beings. For us, Hanu, don't you see? To say
"yes". This would be true courage. But I cannot, not yet, be an
asarya. Everywhere I look, at Bardo, at the blessed people,
even at you – everything I see shouts "No!".'
'But you're still determined to be a pilot?'
'Bardo thinks this is my best hope for saving the people.'
'The Alaloi?'
'Yes, the blessed people.'
  'But that isn't the only reason you want to become a pilot,
is it?'
'No.'
  'You told me once that you wanted to find the centre of the
universe.'
  Danlo looked off into the depths of the Ice Dome. All around
him was the sound of sleds rocketing across their courts and
water vapour hugging the ice like a wet grey fur. He crossed
his arms over his chest and said, 'I used to think of the
world, of the universe ... as a great circle. The great circle
of halla. Sometimes I still believe that I might journey to the
centre of this circle.'
'To see the universe just as it is?'
 'Yes,' Danlo said. The world, as most people see it, the way
they live life ... it is false, a deception, a lie.'
 With his skate blade Hanuman began chopping at the mound of
snow he had dug up. He said, 'And that's why
451
 I'll become a cetic. I have to uncover the centre of myself.
To see if it's a lie.'
'And then?'
 'And then war,' Hanuman said. 'I'm at war with myself, and I
need to know if I'm capable of this kind of murder.'
  That was all he said to Danlo then. He might have admitted
more, much more, but he was good at keeping secrets, sometimes
even from himself. It is probable that he wanted to tell Danlo
the full truth about his decision to become a cetic. But truth,
as the Fravashi say, is multiple and complex; finding the truth
is like uncovering the most perfect grain of a beach's billions
of glittering sands. In truth, Hanuman never understood that
marvellous quality he called wildness. Wildness is that urge,
trait, sense and part of the will which recognizes one's deep
self in all the elements of creation and feels the fiery
signature of the universe written deep inside oneself. True
wildness kills. It pulls one into consciousness of all things,
deeper into life, and thus into death, for death is the left
hand of life and is always as close as the next heartbeat.
There are quick deaths accomplished by climbers of mountains
falling from the heights, or by lost pilots seeking the
impossible whose lightships fall into the centres of blue giant
stars; there is the slow death of the alcohol addict, the
whoremonger's diseased life and death, the autist's sad death
of dreams and the mad death of neurosingers who cannot face
away from the cybernetic heaven of their computers. There is
the timeless, recurring death of the Alaloi hunter far out on
the sea ice, out in the great loneliness, who listens to the
Song of Life and enters into that mystical land called the
altjiranga mitjina. And then there is the hardest death of all.
To feel the fire for the infinite inside and let it burn, to
die each moment and each moment be reborn from the ashes of
that holy inner fire, to create oneself anew in the image of
one's deepest passions and vision – this is the death and life
of a man who would become a god. All
452
 Hanuman's instincts pulled him toward this fate. Only, he
lacked the courage for his best possibilities; he feared his
own essential wildness. And so he clung furiously to his sense
of himself, to his identity, to his ideals, emotions, and
awareness, to all the parts of his being that Danlo would have
called merely 'face', but which Hanuman revered as precious and
immutable, and would not suffer to come to harm. Other
qualities he sacrificed without mercy or shame. Because he
thought himself fated for the hardest of paths, he wilfully –
and tragically – annihilated precisely those passions which
would have made him truly great. He, born a sensitive and
gentle manchild, had tried to make himself the hardest of men.
He, blessed with a rare will to life and compassion for others,
had twisted his love for Danlo into hatred of his tormentor,
and so he had made himself murder the novice Pedar Sadi Sanat.
The warrior-poet had not lied, after all; Hanuman had truly
executed this murder. He had done this deed not with the
imaginings of his mind's eye, but with his hands and his will
and his hateful heart.
  On the evening after Danlo had slashed his forehead in the
Shih Grove, after Hanuman had repaired this dreadful wound, he
had gone into the Farsider's Quarter, down to the Street of
Smugglers. With the last of the money he had brought to
Neverness, he had purchased a dreammaker. A dreammaker: a shiny
black device the size of a child's heart. An array of
neurologics and chips of etched diamond programmed to produce a
certain image field. Dreammakers were toys for adults jaded
with the everyday world; dreammakers were also pedagogic tools
of the cetics, who used them to test their students' ability to
distinguish the simulated from the real. Hanuman had found a
different use for his dreammaker. While the other boys were
asleep, he had hidden the dreammaker beneath his covers. He had
lain in wait for Pedar to pay his nightly visit. And then, just
as Pedar crested the stairs, when he had a clear line of sight,
Hanuman had aimed the
453
 dreammaker carefully. Certain images were infused directly
into Pedar's visual cortex at the back of his head. Images of
Scutari mothers eating their firstborn children. Dark,
writhing, bloody aliens that Hanuman created to frighten Pedar
and make him fall. To kill him – Hanuman did not like to lie to
himself about his own deepest purposes. He murdered to save
Danlo from further torment and shame. And he murdered because
the very act of murder had always been hateful to him. And most
of all, he murdered because he needed to sear away the secret
weakness of his soul. This was the real reason he would become
a cetic. He would use the sublime and powerful cetic arts to
continue the fiery work of remaking himself. At the centre of
his soul where the pain was the most urgent, he might find the
source of his own suffering and burn it away, utterly. All this
he longed to tell Danlo, but he was afraid he would be
misunderstood. And then Madhava li Shing led their thirteen
remaining hall-mates onto the ice of the polo field, and the
moment was lost.
'Danlo, are you coming?'
  Danlo stood at the field's edge, watching Hanuman force his
way to the centre of his hallmates as they skated together in
swarm. Oh, Hanu, Hanu! he thought. What have you done? The
light streaming down through the Dome fell over Hanuman so that
his face reflected the colours of white and gold. Because
Hanuman's face was so terrible to behold just then, Danlo
looked down at the ice. He looked away from the truth, much as
one might look away from a beautiful but doomed star for fear
that it might explode. He was aware of his heart beating,
strongly, quickly, pushing him moment by moment into a future
that he could never quite know. And then, from deep inside
himself, there came a whisper like that of the wind through a
grove of shatterwood trees. He heard himself answer the dread
question that he had asked, but this one time in his life he
did not listen.
454
 'Danlo, are you coming?' Hanuman called out again. 'Yes,'
Danlo said. And then he skated out onto the ice to finish the
game of hokkee.
 455



PART THREE

The Way of Ringess




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

The Return of a Pilot

All of history is man's attempt to find his proper relationship
to God.
 – from A Requiem For Homo Sapiens by Horthy Hosthoh

To a young man, even a student of the most fabulous and
powerful school on the Civilized Worlds, the times during which
he comes to maturity always seem normal no matter how
extraordinary, how turbulent with change they really are.
Imminent change and danger act as drugs upon the human brain,
or rather, as rich foods that nourish the urge toward more
life. And how easily one becomes used to such nourishment.
Those who survive the signal events of history – the wars,
plagues, alien contacts, vastenings, speciations and religious
awakenings – develop a taste for ferment and evolution next to
which all the moments of 'normal' existence will seem dull,
flat, meaningless. (Indeed, viewed from a godly coign of
vantage across more than two million years, nothing about
humankind's astonishing journey from the grassy veldts of
Afarique to the galaxy's cold, numinous stars can be seen as
normal.) If the career of Danlo wi Soli Ringess was truly
remarkable, truly pregnant with wild moments, tragedy, historic
decisions and acts, it is nevertheless also true that he rarely
thought of himself as a remarkable man, nor did he regard the
universe into which he had been born as a hostile or an
essentially tragic place. It was a hard place, certainly, full
of capriciously exploding supernovae, terrible gods and new
ecologies of life. A universe out of balance. The world
459
 around him was steeped in vice, injustice, lies, slelled
diseases, all the manifestations of human evil. All the worlds
around the stars were tainted with shaida, perhaps flawed to
their fiery, molten cores. Possibly there was no help for the
universe's evil; possibly he (along with all of humanity) might
find a way to restore the primeval balance of life and bring
all things into that state of correctness and natural order
that he called halla. But not even a halla universe, he knew,
could ever be peaceful. Like a winter storm, the universe would
always roar with violence, chaos and change. It was this
essential chaos of his times that he had come to relish. It
never occurred to him – as it did to Hanuman li Tosh – that the
universe might be transformed in fundamental and horrible new
ways.
  There is not a great deal to tell of Danlo's passage from
Borja and his early years as a journeyman at the Pilots'
College, Resa. He was a brilliant student, though brilliant in
a natural, offhand manner that never aroused his fellow
journeymen's envy or ire. Mathematics, fugue, fenestration and
hallning – the disciplines that he learned to become a full
pilot required much of his time but did not mark him deeply, at
least, not until the end of this exciting period. To be sure,
he had to master the interface with his ship computer, and in
doing so, he became enraptured with the different states of
cybernetic consciousness. All journeymen pilots must suffer
through this love-addiction with their computers. Danlo quickly
became an aficionado and adept of that marvellous state known
as samadhi vastening. Unlike the first and lowest samadhi state
– that of savikalpa samadhi – in the vastening through the
computer, there is no awareness of one's mind as distinct from
the computer's lightning number flows. The sense of oneself
dissolves, as of electrons rushing and spreading out through
the microscopic filaments of a computer's neurologics. There is
an experience of oneness, a unity with the cybernetic space of
the manifold. Time nearly stops. In entering the onstreaming
realm of pure mathematics, a
460
 pilot has a giddy and joyous sense of thinking faster, making
connections, of being a vaster mind. This intense
depersonalization and vastening of the self is a marvel to
some, a nightmare to a few, and a peril to all who face their
computers deeply. Many are the pilots who have been lost into
the number storm's cold and terrible beauty. Pilots die in a
thousand ways, and the foremost of these deaths is into their
computers. Although Danlo did not design the computer that was
the brain and soul of his lightship, he soon learned to meld
his mind with it totally and comfortably – but never too
comfortably. His ship itself – a beautiful sweep of spun
diamond which he named The Owl – he did design and make, with
the help of a cadre of tinkers, architects, programmers, and
robots. He took his ship out into space to the nearby planets,
Ninsun and Silvaplana, and then into that brilliant, eternal
mathematical space that lies beyond and beneath the space of
the visible universe. It was Danlo's talent and strength not
only to survive his first tentative entries into the manifold,
but to gain from these journeys knowledge that he might apply
to his own peculiar problems, and to the basic problem of the
great civilization spread out all around him, above the icy
streets and glittering towers of Neverness and out across the
stars.
 And what did he learn during these years as a journeyman
pilot? He learned no startling new truths about his world, but
rather refined his way of seeing it. This was a continuation of
a quest for vision that had begun early in his childhood, only
to intensify during his stay in Old Father's house and his
entrance into the Order. It was his admitted purpose to 'see
the universe just as it is'. To behold it, clearly, deeply and
truly, and to say 'yes' to all he could see. Ironically though,
the more keen his vision grew and the more adept he became in
seeing into the wasting soul of humanity, the more he was
tempted to say 'no'. As he grew into a full and free manhood,
he became ever more critical of civilized people and their
strange
461
 beliefs, cultures and institutions. He donned the black racing
kamelaika of a journeyman pilot, and he skated alone down
forbidden city streets, roaming the dim glidderies of the
Farsider's Quarter, making friends in all classes and sects of
people wherever he went. And almost always, in almost everyone,
he found something wanting. (Though, because he was a
compassionate man who still honoured the Fravashi ideal, he
took care never to reflect or remind others of this want; even
in the lowliest of wormrunners, he always found qualities he
could like, or even love, and thus he was always loved in
return.) He would go among the harijan, whores, exemplars,
autists, and arhats, looking in their hurried eyes for the
light of consciousness. All too often – especially in the Lords
of the Order – the light was sickly and fragile, like an
oilstone's naked flame wavering about in the wind. Watching the
way people watched each other, always judging or desiring or
dismissing, always in fear of themselves, he came to realize
that the basic fault of everyday human consciousness was that
it was cut off from the rest of the universe. All human beings
in all places had suffered the pain and loneliness of living as
separate beings, but over the millennia, this pain had deepened
to a racial agony. As humankind had evolved from bands of
primitive fruit gatherers to sophisticates dwelling in a
star-flung civilization, the split between the self and the
other parts of creation had grown as vast as the great
emptiness between the galaxies. Human beings, he learned, had
sought to heal or overcome this split in different ways. Some
became nature mystics and lost themselves in their rapture with
earth, wind and sky; some used drugs; some dreamed deep and
lucid dreams; some disciplined themselves to be mystics of the
computer: the neurosinger grade of the cetics, some of the
cyber-shamans, his fellow Pilots of the Order of Mystic
Mathematicians, and others. The men and women of a few sects,
such as the astriers, ignored the deeper problems of existence.
They did this by spawning large broods of children. Sometimes
one woman, over
462
 her hundred-year fertility, would give birth once every year.
Astriers wholly surrendered themselves to the animal activities
of life: the getting of food, water, clothing, money, jewellery
and often dreammakers and other devices with which to dull the
brain and soul. Other human beings had denied the fault of
their consciousnesses; many – during the Age of Science – had
even gloried in the separation of man from nature, subject from
object, fact from meaning, mind from matter. But the most
universal human method of bridging the Void has always been the
invention of religion. It was Danlo's fate to become a student
of religions, as well as of mathematics; during his first and
second year at Resa, he spent many moments trying to understand
the fundamental passion that lay at the core of all religions:
the urge of the self to embrace the universe's cold, mysterious
otherness.
 If animistic totem systems, alien philosophies, holism, the
Creed of Chance and the beliefs of various disciplines as
different as cantorian mathematics and scrying are all seen as
springing from this fundamental urge, then it is fair to say
that Danlo experienced forty religions by the time he was
twenty years old. At least forty religions. Much has already
been said of his initiation into the Alaloi dreamtime, of the
altjiranga mitjina, the Old Ones and the Song Of Life. Since
coming to Neverness, he had absorbed a good deal of the
Fravashi language philosophy, flirted with tychism and learned
something of the autists' dream system of reconstructing
reality. He won friends among the scryers and inveigled them to
teach him the secret doctrine of the sarvam asti. He dabbled
with the ancient kabalah and number mysticism. In order to
understand Hanuman's hatred of Edeism, he sought out various
sects of the Cybernetic Universal Church which were still
prominent on Neverness: the Architects of the Universal God,
The Church of Ede and the Cybernetic Pilgrims of the Manifold.
Once or twice he even participated in their rituals, including
the ecstatic facing ceremony. This exotic
 463
 and arcane experience of Danlo's – Hanuman cynically referred
to it as religious gourmandizing – was a necessary phase in his
life's journey to become both visionary and asarya. Entering
into the passion and beliefs of any particular religion was
like viewing reality through a crystal lens. Always, like a
child's prism held up to one's eye, the lens of ritual and
belief distorted reality and coloured it in strange (and
sometimes beautiful) ways. But in each religion, cult, or
faith, Danlo hoped to find a universal centre, a jewel of truth
as pure and clear as a diamond. It was his task and destiny, as
he conceived it, to grasp each religion he could find, to
apprehend the world through its beliefs, and with the
hammerstone of his will, to shatter the lens. Only then might
the diamond centre be revealed; only then could he see things
clearly. And someday he might look at the universe through his
own eyes only, free of even diamond lenses, free to behold the
infinite stellar fires and humanity's burning pain through the
consciousness of his deepest self. 'Seeking freedom through
religion,' Hanuman said to Danlo one day after they had passed
on from Borja and become journeymen, 'is like trying to
understand aliens by offering oneself as a Scutari's dinner.'
 Indeed, the whole of Danlo's life journey was perilous, like
crossing over a narrow, icy bridge. It is hard to see one's way
through the ice-fog of different belief systems. He who seeks
easily gets lost. Or falls. Of all the religions he
encountered, the most treacherous and difficult to break free
from was the Order's omnipresent holism. Of course, most
masters of the Order would have denied that holism was anything
like a religion. They would have pointed out that becoming a
novice in the Order required no profession of faith, no
theology, no adherence to doctrine or sacred beliefs. And at
first glance this was true. Thus it was all the more difficult
for Danlo to swing the hammer of his insight and smash this
subtle, evanescent lens. Holism lay at the very soul of his
civilization; people took the holistic worldview for granted
and did not ques-
464
tion its beliefs, any more than they thought about the air they
breathed. Few remembered the origins of holism; few realized
(or cared) that humanity had once conceived the universe in a
very different way.
  'Holism,' Master Jonath once said to Danlo, 'defines the
Sixth Mentality of man. Some call it the Last Mentality –how
could there be a more evolved way of modelling reality, can you
tell me?'
  Historically, holism had been a break from the reductionist
methods of science. Holism – some call it the 'second science'
– is a way of viewing the universe as a web of interactions and
relationships. Whole systems (and the universe can be seen as
an overarching system of systems) have properties beyond those
of their parts. All things are, in some sense, alive, or a part
of a living system; the real world of mind and matter, body and
consciousness, cannot be understood by reducing it to pieces
and parts. 'Matter is mind' – this is perhaps the holists'
quintessential belief. The founding theories of holism had
tried to explain how mind emerges from the material universe,
how the consciousness of all things is interconnected.
  The first science, of course, had failed utterly to do this.
The first science had resigned human beings to acting as
objective observers of a mechanistic and meaningless universe.
A dead universe. The human mind, according to the determinists,
was merely the by-product of brain chemistry. Chemical laws,
the way the elements combine and interact, were formulated as
complete and immutable truths. The elements themselves were
seen as indivisible lumps of matter, devoid of consciousness,
untouched and unaffected by the very consciousnesses seeking to
understand how living minds can be assembled from dead matter.
The logical conclusion of these assumptions and conceptions was
that people are like chemical robots possessing no free will.
No wonder the human race, during the Holocaust Century, had
fallen into insanity and despair.
Holism had been an attempt to restore life to this
465
universe and to reconnect human beings with it. To heal the
split between self and other. But ultimately, over the
centuries, holism too had failed. Over the three thousand
years since the founding of Neverness, the professionals and
academicians of the Order had mostly forgotten that holism
should be a merging of theory and personal experience. They
dwelt too deeply in abstraction and theory. The new theories
that had given birth to holism – quantum mechanics, batesonian
epistemology, general systems theory, cybernetics and
information theory – had grown into elaborate, intricate
systems representing reality with the language and symbols of
the universal syntax. From the very beginning of holism, some
viewed this reality as a cybernetic reality. Nature was seen
as a network of programmable entities exchanging information,
life as an information flow that terminated when the flow was
cut off. The computer became a model for the mind and a
metaphor of the universe. Indeed, the most dogmatic of the
cybernetic holists regarded the universe as an actual
computer, the mind as a set of programs run by this computer,
or by its component units. Using Omar Narayama's universal
syntax, the holists of the Order constructed a formal system,
or science, that treated the individual mind as sub-programs
of a universal algorithm. It was a brilliant, but ultimately
alienating, way of conceiving the universe. Alienating because
it resolved the self/other split in form only.
  For example, the holists have canonized the infamous bell
theorem of ancient quantum mechanics. They exalt the sublime
properties of light, teaching that each photon in a pair of
photons will 'remember' the polarity of its mate no matter how
far in spacetime the two are separated. Matter is memory, the
holists say. They teach that each person's body-mind is wholly
connected, electron to electron, to the whole fabric of the
universe. Each quantum event, each of the trillions of times
reality's particles interact with each other every instant, is
like a note that rings
466
and resonates throughout the great bell of creation. And the
sound of the ringing propagates instantaneously, everywhere at
once, interconnecting all things. This is a truth of our
universe. It is a mystical truth, that reality at its deepest
level is an undivided wholeness. It has been formalized and
canonized, and taught to the swarms of humanity searching for a
fundamental unity. Only, human beings have learned it as a
theory and a doctrine, not as an experience. A true holism
should embrace not only the theory of living systems, but also
the reality of the belly, of wind, hunger, and snowworms
roasting over a fire on a cold winter night. A man or woman (or
child) to be fully human, should always marvel at the mystery
of life. We each should be able to face the universe and drink
in the stream of photons shimmering across the light-distances,
to listen to the ringing of the farthest galaxies, to feel the
electrons of each haemoglobin molecule spinning and vibrating
deep inside the blood. No one should ever feel cut off from the
ocean of mind and memory surging all around; no one should ever
stare up at the icy stars and feel abandoned or alone. It was
partly the fault of holism that a whole civilization had
suffered the abandonment of its finest senses, ten thousand
trillion islands of consciousness born into the pain and
promise of neverness, awaiting death with glassy eyes and
murmured abstractions upon their lips, always fearing life,
always longing for a deeper and truer experience of living.
  And yet there have always been those little interested in
the tenets of holism (or science, or any ism), those who have
turned inward to listen to the exquisite rhythms of mind and
blood. Holism, some say, is a failed mysticism, a mysticism
without a heart, and so the ancient quest for a tao, or way of
life, continues. Throughout all of history, dating back past
Old Earth's ur-civilizations to the primitive shamans of the
forests and deserts, seekers of this way have carried on an
unbroken, hidden tradition, an evolutionary journey deeper into
life. These remarkable women and
467
men are the founts of energy that each society of humankind
calls upon when its vitality has weakened and dimmed. The Order
itself has always depended upon its seekers of the ineffable
and the immanent: the secret grades of cyber-shamans, a few
maverick pilots, the yogin branch among the cetics, of course,
and the best of the scryers and remembrancers. This is ironic,
perhaps even tragic. For this brilliant minority has always
sought to transform the Order, while the Order – the old
orthodox masters and lords with their cold hearts and stony
faces –has appropriated its finest discoveries, sucked the life
out of the most vital knowledge, and reworked its remains into
the theories and formal systems of holism. The Order, grown
rigid and ossified as old bone, in many ways has exacerbated
the basic fault of human consciousness. The people of the
Civilized Worlds have always looked to the Order for truth and,
too often, they have been given instead the symbols of the
universal syntax, artificial intelligence, computer simulations
of reality, form over essence, formalizations of the infinite
in exchange for life. And thus the great stellar civilization
of Danlo's time, after three thousand years, had grown as worn
and brittle as old glass, All around him, in Neverness and in a
million other lesser cities, were men and women who lived too
long and became strangers to their bodies, who feared the
organic, who dwelt too long in dreams, or in their computers'
tantalizing surrealities, or in cold libraries of stone. And
yet everywhere, in the pretty streets and cafes, he saw people
who longed for something more, even if they were unaware of
their desire. All human beings desire deep in themselves to
feel the lifefire quickening along their blood, to be awakened
to this ancient and holy burning inside others. Civilized human
beings, Danlo thought in his more cynical moments, were like
trillions of lumps of dead matter awaiting an intense light to
ignite them. Inevitably, some remarkable and brilliant man (or
woman) would return from the drears of space with starlight in
his
468
 hand and fire in his eyes, and then the burning would jump
from lip to lip and brow to brow as human beings came alive to
their possibilities. Then there would be chaos. Then humanity
would fuse together and explode across the stars, either into
true awakening, or into something else, perhaps some horrible
mechanism for destruction the shape of which Danlo could only
glimpse. That he had been born into such times and might live
to see this explosion never surprised him. But he never guessed
the initial flash would originate from an astonishing source so
close to him, or that he would be caught up in its fervour from
almost the very beginning.
  On the 12th of false winter in the year 2953 since the
founding of Neverness, a deepship fell out into the near-space
above the City. Its name was the Ring of Glory, and it was
owned by a renegade pilot of the Order, Pesheval Sarojin
Vishnu-Shiva Lal, whom everyone knew as Bardo. For three days
and nights, ferries rocketed up through the atmosphere. Their
thunder and fire split the air above the Hollow Fields, making
a fine show for the inevitable swarms of people who line the
pads and runs while awaiting a deepship's arrival. One by one,
the ferries glided planetward, fetching the contents of the
deepship's holds. Bardo had brought back with him riches and
many, many things, the pelf of a hundred worlds: gosharps and
sihu oil, furniture, bonsai plants, sacred jewellery from
Vesper, blacking oil, tondos, paintings and Darghinni
sculpture, many kinds of sense boxes including dreammakers and
other exotic toys, and Yarkona diamonds, and Darkmoon rubies,
emeralds, opals, firestones, and pearls from the ocean floors
of New Earth, Fravashi carpets, of course, and drugs such as
jook, jambool, toalache, beer and skotch. How he had acquired
this vast wealth in only five years was the talk of the City.
Some said that he had broken his vow of poverty as long ago as
his novitiate, that he had inherited a part of his family's
estates (he was born a prince of Summerworld) and had kept
money in secret. He had
469
parlayed this minor fortune, some of his old friends said,
into a very great one. Others were not so kind. His enemies
among the lords and masters accused him of trafficking in
women, or running outlawed technology. A few – the Lord Pilot
Chanoth Chen Ciceron was one of these – hinted that he had
betrayed the Order. 'It's always tempting for a pilot to sell
his skills to the Merchant Pilots of Tria,' he was heard to
say. 'Or to teach the way of our mathematics, which we must
always keep secret.'
  There was some truth to these rumours, but only some. In
truth, Bardo had traded secrets for money, but not the secrets
of the Order. Years ago, on his infamous journey to Ksandaria,
he had penetrated the forbidden knowledge pools of the great
library and had illicitly copied much information. This
information – topological mappings of lost worlds, outlawed
technology, historical facts that might be used to discredit
the doctrines of major religions, and antique music, fantasies
and tone poems of incalculable value – he had stored in a
firestone that he kept always on his person, usually on a
silver chain about his neck. Except for this single firestone,
he was a poor man, for he had long since spent the remnants of
his family fortune. After abjuring his vows and being stripped
of his lightship, he sold all his other possessions for eight
thousand City disks. He used this money to buy a passage on a
prayer ship bound for Vesper, Larondissement, and Tria. On
Tria, at first, he was taken for just another wormrunner with a
firestone to sell. He was treated poorly. But when the
merchant-princes and merchant-pilots discovered that he was
Bardo, a former master pilot of the Order, they feted him. They
provided him with a low estate, women, the finest of drugs,
musics and foods. They offered him a high estate and the title
of merchant-king, if only he would join them and teach them the
Order's ineffable art of mathematics. It would be wrong to
suppose that Bardo wasn't tempted by this offer. He was very
tempted. He wouldn't have been the first pilot to defect to
Tria, but he
470
would have been the greatest pilot, the only master pilot ever
to so betray the Order. In the end, he declined to become a
merchant-king, not because he loved the Order, but because he
was possessed of a larger vision and purpose. And so he sold
the Trians his firestone and all the information it contained.
He bought a vast, silvery deepship. And he left Tria without
regret, entering into the twisted space of the manifold that
lies beneath the stars. He fenestered from window to window as
he journeyed through the fallaways into the heart of the
Civilized Worlds.
   'All of history is humanity's attempt to increase its
wealth,' Bardo once said, and the next few years of his life
were to prove the poignancy of this saying. To chronicle the
exact sequence of Bardo's journeys from star to star and his
acquisition of wealth would be pointless. He visited many
worlds, buying and selling many things. He was a brilliant and
cunning man with a talent for trade, and his inherent laziness
had evaporated before the blaze of his purpose. He prospered.
He enjoyed an exponential increase of wealth. A large part of
his fortune he gained in a triangular trade among the worlds of
Simoom, Yarkona and Catava. The trade worked like this: on
Simoom he would fill the holds of his ship with thousands of
astrier families. These were all Architects of one kind or
another; at that time, the Simoom hierocracy was persecuting
all the Cybernetic churches and any Architect who could afford
a passage was fleeing to Yarkona and other open worlds. The
richest Architects paid Bardo fabulous amounts of money for
their passages. They did this because Bardo was a master of the
pilot's art and his Ring of Glory could make the run between
Simoom and Yarkona with fewer falls and much more quickly than
any deepship of the Trian merchants. With every arrival of
families desperate to establish themselves, the price of
property on Yarkona increased, hence the Architects' panic to
reach that rich planet before the next wave of refugees drove
471
the prices up still further. (Then, too, the Architects could
never be sure when Yarkona would close its cities to them and
they would be isolated on Simoom, perhaps to suffer pogroms and
genocide.) On Yarkona, Bardo would unload this human cargo. He
would relax in the most luxurious of brothels, eating spiced,
fiery foods and losing himself in the silky clasp of the
Yarkonan women while he awaited the yearly opening of the
Yarkonan gem market. On the first hour of the market, he would
use the Architects' passage money to buy up the best of the
bluestar diamonds and firestones. He always outbid his
competitors. He would load the gems onto the Ring of Glory,
collect a few thousand pilgrims and make the long journey to
Catava. Again, because he had once been a pilot of the Order,
one of the finest there had ever been, he made this long
journey in only a few falls. He was always the first of the gem
merchants to arrive each year. Catava, of course, is the seat
of the Cybernetic Reformed Churches; it is the only place on
the Civilized Worlds to fabricate the priceless Edic lights
that grace the altar of every Cybernetic church across the
galaxy. And the Edic lights, according to the revised version
of Nikolos Daru Ede's Principles of Cybernetic Architecture,
must always be made of true Yarkonan firestones. The Catavan
Architects can never get enough good firestones, and so Bardo
always sold these jewelled, living computers at enormous
profit. After which he would fill his ship with facing
computers, and with cleansing and vastening computers. 'Catava
makes the holiest computers,' as the saying goes. He would then
complete the third segment of his journey. On Simoom he would
sell these holy computers to the many Cybernetic churches
there. The manufacture of computers on that austere world,
naturally, has always been illegal, but the Architects must
have computers for their ceremonies. And so Bardo paid huge
bribes to his Simoom agents and the wormrunners who smuggled
his wares; he emptied his holds, added to his fortune and began
anew selling passages to refugees bound for
472
 Yarkona. Five times he made this triangular journey. When he
returned to Neverness, he was perhaps the richest man in the
City. He astonished everyone by buying a famous house in the
Old City and announcing that he would spend the rest of his
days (and fortune) pursuing a deeper way of life.
   On the 69th of false winter, after remodelling his house and
installing it with many beautiful things, he opened his doors
to the artistic elite, the seekers, outsiders and brightest
malcontents in the City. Each night, beginning at dusk, Bardo
held a joyance, a feast of life, a quickening of all the senses
that was supposed to be a celebration and remembrance of the
secret of life. 'Mallory Ringess sacrificed himself seeking the
Elder Eddas,' Bardo was fond of telling everyone as he served
them rare foods, wine and pipes glowing with toalache. The
Elder Eddas, the secrets of the gods – it's inside each of us,
coiled like trillions of sacred snakes into our very cells,
coded into our goddamned chromosomes. To try to remember the
secret of life – that's the way of the Ringess.' Bardo's
parties quickly became very popular; he gathered around himself
a circle of spelists, courtesans, neurosingers and old friends.
And others: most nights his rooms overflowed with ronin
warrior-poets, wormrunners, hibakusha and many uninvited
guests. These seekers of the earthy and very effable delights
of his house quickly became a nuisance, and Bardo had to begin
issuing invitations to his joyances. Only those bearing a steel
card engraved with the hologram of two interlinked rings – a
black diamond ring and a ring of gold – were admitted through
his outer doors. Throughout the City, a card to Bardo's house
became a much coveted thing. By the end of false winter, even
many of the Order's professionals and academicians had grown
curious about Bardo's strange and exciting celebrations, and
they schemed to acquire an invitation, often badgering Bardo or
one of his circle until a card was forthcoming. But not
everyone was so lucky; a desperate few demeaned
473
themselves buying the much-traded cards that the worm-runners
sold on open market outside the Hofgarten, or they bribed
other masters to surrender theirs. So when, on the 88th of
false winter, a messenger arrived at one of Resa's dormitories
bearing a gleaming steel card for Danlo wi Soli Ringess, his
fellow journeymen and master pilots were envious indeed.
  'May you be enlightened tonight,' a sarcastic young pilot
named Orah Bey said to Danlo as he stopped him on the
well-tended ice of Resa Commons. Danlo was eager to see Bardo
again and he impatiently slid his racing blades back and forth
across the ice as he listened to Orah lecture him. This will
likely be your only journey to Bardo's house – if the lords
don't issue an injunction against attending his parties, I'll
be much surprised.'
  As it happened, that very same morning, Hanuman li Tosh had
also received an invitation. When Danlo discovered this during
lunch (the two of them had remained friends and frequently
took meals together), he arranged to accompany Hanuman to
Bardo's joyance. At sunset they met outside the Academy's West
Gate, whose scorched, steel doors always stood open to the
lights of the City. Hanuman was waiting near the door, beneath
the granite blocks of the Wounded Wall, and he greeted Danlo
as he always did, with a smile and a quick head bow. 'Hello,
Danlo,' he said.
  'Hanu, Hanu, are you ready?' Danlo said. This is a splendid
night.'
  It was an evening of songbirds and sweet smells, the kind of
restless evening that drives the citizens of Neverness out into
the streets seeking uncertain delights. Thousands of
fritillaries, their wings violet and blue with the season's
colours, fluttered among the snow dahlia and other flowers that
lined the Wounded Wall. The slidderies of the Old City shone
with melted water, here and there gathered into shallow
puddles, or spread out like a silvery lens over the crimson
ice. It would be hours yet before the air fell
474
 to freezing and the streets glazed over. Despite the warmth,
however, Hanuman was dressed in a formal cetic's robe, with a
thick fur stola draped around his shoulders. His clothes were
of a cetic's orange madder, a hideous colour for any human
being to wear. In truth, Hanuman, with his pale eyes and pale
yellow hair, looked ghastly all swaddled up in orange. His
milk-white skin had a sickly, translucent cast to it, like that
of a paper lampshade inadequately covering the inner fire which
kept him living. He stood coughing into his gloved hands,
catching and coughing at the cancers in his lungs that he had
been unable to cure himself of. Although he had attained his
full growth – he and Danlo were both twenty-one years old – he
was still slight of stature, and still too thin.
  'Let's skate down the Serpentine,' Danlo said. The most
beautiful women promenade there, this time of night.'
 The contrast Danlo made with Hanuman was striking. He, too,
was lean, but his was the leanness of an animal of the wild
who loves wind and sky and movement, who takes nothing more
from the world than is needed to live. Over the past five
years he had grown even stronger and quite tall; he had grown
the beard of a full Alaloi man, and his black hair, long and
wild as tundra weed, rippled about his neck and shoulders. He
still kept Ahira's white feather fastened in his hair. Gone
was the white cap of Borja, and gone too was his deference to
rules and the expectations of others. He wore a black racing
kamelaika tight around his body and limbs. It was a garment
one might choose for a game of hokkee or bump-and-skate, but
hardly appropriate for a party attended by Neverness's
illuminati. When Hanuman chided him for his indecorous attire,
he smiled and said nothing. He flung himself down the Old City
streets, and he moved as lightly as a sea bird skating along
cold currents of air.
  They picked their way among the crowds of the Serpentine,
that longest of slidderies which sinuously twists
475
throughout the entire City, from the Elf Gardens to West
Beach. Once or twice they paused to admire the beautiful
women. These were mostly young astriers whose families forced
them to promenade in fetching fur gowns or kimonos, in the
hope of soliciting marriage contracts from the wealthy astrier
men who swarm the upper segments of the Serpentine each night.
 'They are each ... so lovely,' Danlo said. He caught the eye
of a woman on the far side of the sliddery. She was dressed in
a kimono of Japanese green, and her arms were laced through
the arms of two other women who were probably her sisters.
Although astriers shun others outside their sect, especially
pilots of the Order forbidden by their vows to marry, when
Danlo smiled at her she bowed her head coyly and smiled back
at him.
'Your love of women will be your death,' Hanuman said.
  'But, Hanu, you have said that about other things, and here
I am, still alive.'
'And alive you'll always be – until you're not.'
  Danlo drank in the sensations of the street: the lowing
voices, the swish of expensive fabrics brushing him as the
swarms of humanity passed by, the polished boots and gleaming
skates, the smells of wet ice and rare perfumes and sweat. He
turned to Hanuman and said, 'I have already admitted that
Bardo is a dangerous man. Dangerous ... to me, at least. Must
we dwell on those dangers?'
'Why shouldn't we? Since you love any kind of danger.'
  Danlo rubbed the livid, lightning-shaped scar above his eye
and smiled. 'I think Bardo is attempting something new. Truly.
To attempt to remember the Elder Eddas – this is a noble thing,
yes? The Order should be leading the way in recovering and
delineating this knowledge. The remembrancers should be.
Instead, there is talk of imposing an injunction against
Bardo's joyances.'
  'Do you expect the Order to encourage the conceits of a new
cult?'
'A cult?' Danlo said as he brushed back the hair from
476
 his forehead. 'But Bardo has denied he has any religious
aspirations.'
 'And the louder he denies it,' Hanuman said, 'the more surely
he condemns himself.'
  'Sometimes I think that civilized people ... need a new
religion. They are so unhappy. So dead inside, so lost.'
'I'll never understand your passion for religions.'
 'That is because your sole religious experience has been with
Edeism.'
'Which is all the experience I desire.'
  'And here I stand,' Danlo said, and he laughed softly, 'both
tychist and holist, and Architect, and Sufi, and Zen Buddhist,
and a Fravashi adept, and perhaps even ... a would-be Alaloi
shaman. I must vex you, sometimes.'
 Hanuman led Danlo into a vacant warming pavilion at the edge
of the street where they might have a space of privacy. He
said, 'You do vex me. Which is why you're my friend.'
 'If Bardo has truly found a way to remember the Elder Eddas,'
Danlo said, 'this is not religion. It is experience.'
 'Oh, there's no doubt that Bardo and his circle have
remembered something. But the Elder Eddas? Do you really
believe a race of aliens – or gods – encoded their secrets
into human chromosomes?'
'Why not?' Danlo said, and he smiled.
  'I thought you didn't like to believe anything. Don't your
Fravashi teach that "beliefs are the eyelids of the mind"?
That one should put aside all beliefs?'
  'Yes,' Danlo said, still smiling, 'including the belief that
one should put aside all beliefs.'
 'You amaze me,' Hanuman coughed out as he shook his head back
and forth. 'Amaze me. Can I conclude that you will therefore
embrace this experience of Ringism that Bardo claims to offer
everyone?'
 Danlo now was laughing openly, and laid his hand on Hanuman's
shoulder. His black leather glove sank into the
477
 orange fur of Hanuman's stola. 'Yes, I will embrace it. But
only for a while. Perhaps only for tonight.'
 For a moment, Hanuman smiled at Danlo, but then his face fell
tight and secretive. 'I'm afraid that Bardo will want to use
you,' he said.
  'Oh, but Bardo uses everyone. He would not be Bardo if he
didn't.'
  'But you're the son of Mallory Ringess. Your very presence
validates his joyances, you should know.'
 'That is true,' Danlo said. 'And I accept that. But can you
accept that Bardo ... might want to use you?'
'As a cetic? Because I've become a cetic?'
'Yes.'
 'Well,' Hanuman said, 'we cetics have our skills, and we
aren't as corruptible as you might think. Perhaps a little
cetic neurologic might keep Bardo from gulling his followers.
It might keep them sane.'
 'I cannot forget ... that Bardo never wanted you to become a
cetic.'
 Hanuman coughed suddenly and then looked over his shoulder at
the diners sitting at the edge of the street. Two of them were
master eschatologists, bright-eyed and fat as seals, but they
seemed aware only of their wine and plates of cultured meats.
'That's true, he didn't, but you don't have to inform the
whole world.'
'I am sorry,' Danlo said.
  'I must pose a dilemma for him,' Hanuman said. 'He'll be
dying to make use of me at the same time he's afraid to. Like
beer, Danlo. To him, I must be as dangerous as his dreaded
beer.'
'But surely he knows other cetics.'
  'You should know,' Hanuman said in a low voice, 'Lord Pall
has issued an injunction, for the cetics only. He's forbidden
us to attend Bardo's joyances.'
'Then you are in violation of your Lord's orders, yes?'
 'Yes and no,' Hanuman said. His eyes seemed to cloud over
like old, opaque glass, and Danlo remembered how
478
he had always hated his friend's hellish eyes. 'Lord Pall must
be an exemplar of our ethics,' Hanuman continued, 'and so,
obviously, he's had to forbid us contact with Bardo's cult. But
secretly – and you mustn't tell anyone this – secretly he
requires information as to what Bardo is doing.'
 'Why? Has he become a seeker of the Elder Eddas? Lord Pall?'
'Lord Pall,' Hanuman said, 'is a complicated man.'
 'It is said that he wants to dissolve the Tetrad. That he
would like to be Lord of the Order.'
'Perhaps.'
'Are you his spy, then?'
'Danlo!'
  'I am sorry. May my tongue freeze to my teeth – I did not
mean to insult you.'
'You're forgiven,' Hanuman said.
  Just then a group of journeyman horologes in bright red
robes clacked down the gliddery in front of the warming
pavilion. They skated tightly together in a pack, bumping
shoulders, laughing lewdly, intent upon themselves. Their lips
were purple from smoked toalache and their faces were set with
eagerness and guilt (and fear) as if they were on their way to
spend the night in one of the alien brothels in the Farsider's
Quarter. Danlo gave them a quick head bow, but they didn't
notice him. Then he turned to Hanuman, and at the same instant,
upon the same breath of air, in unison they each exclaimed the
word, 'Whoremongers!' They laughed together for a while. It was
a game they liked to play, this discernment of others' secrets,
motivations and plans. Hanuman had taught Danlo the cetic's art
of reading faces, and he had become adept at interpreting the
tightened muscles, the eye movements, the stress patterns of
the vocal cords – all the tells that betray the workings of
one's mind. In fact, Danlo's sensitivity to faces was so great
that he could sometimes read even Hanuman's exquisitely
controlled face.
479
  'I think,' Danlo said, 'that you yourself are a seeker ...
of the Elder Eddas. Is this true?'
  Hanuman gazed at Danlo, and his eyes were like old blue ice;
his face was like a frozen and featureless seascape. All
emotions, Danlo remembered, were embedded in the body's muscle
fibres; all one's thoughts were coded in the firing of the
nerves, the electro-chemical signals with which the nerves
touch the muscles into rigidity. The way Hanuman held his eyes
unblinking bespoke a deep disdain of many things, and yet
prefigured a passion for power over himself and his love of
fate.
  'It is true!' Danlo said. 'But not ... wholly true, I do not
think. Since you do not believe in the blessed Eddas, it must
be that you are taken with the search for them. The search for
the sake of seeking, itself, yes?'
  Hanuman laughed softly and said, 'Can't I keep any secrets
from you? I should never have taught you figuration and
reading, you know. That was a violation of my ethics.'
 'But then I would never know ... what you truly think about
things. You have been so inward these last years.'
 ' "As silent as a cetic",' Hanuman said, quoting the old
saying.
  'As silent, yes,' Danlo said. 'And as troubled, as ...
otherworldly.'
 'Well, let me dwell in your world for a moment,' Hanuman
said. He coughed into his orange-gloved hand then, and with a
ferocious force for a man so slight, snapped his wrist and sent
a glob of cancerous phlegm splattering against the wet orange
ice. 'Certainly I'd like to learn the technique of remembering
the Eddas. The remembrancers' techniques. It's said that Bardo
has won over a master remembrancer who's giving away his
professional secrets like a madman casting pearls before
swine.'
 Danlo looked boldly into Hanuman's eyes and asked, 'And you
want to gather up a few of these pearls and bring them back to
your tower?'
480
  'Well, as long as I'm to be the Lord Cetic's spy, I should
receive some sort of payment, don't you think?'
  As the street filled with yet more people flashing past on
promenade, and the smells of roasting coffee, kurmash, garlic
and sweetmeats wafted out of the cafes, they talked briefly of
the ancient rivalry between the cetics and the remembrancers.
Hanuman, who had studied more history than had Danlo, told him
how the cetics, five thousand years previously on Simoom, had
once been their own order. And the remembrancers had been a
branch within the cetics, as devoted to understanding the
secrets of consciousness as any neurologician, cyber-shaman or
yogin. But when the cetics had merged with the holists of
Arcite and the Order of Mystic Mathematicians was born, the
remembrancers had insisted on reorganizing themselves as a
separate profession – as did the scryers. Long before the move
to Neverness, the remembrancers had kept the secrets of their
art from the cetics, whom they regarded either as stultified by
the ancient, orthodox mental arts or corrupted by their use of
computers. And the cetics had guarded their secrets from
everybody. Even from their best friends.
  'I have always wondered what you do in your tower,' Danlo
said. 'Everyone wonders about the Cetics' Tower. It is said
that you use akashic computers ... to recover lost memories, is
this true?'
 Hanuman allowed a smile to break across his delicate lips,
and now his face was truly silent, truly impossible to read.
Danlo rarely discussed with him the arts of their respective
disciplines. He knew, of course, that Hanuman had elected to
become a cyber-shaman; and so his best friend certainly had
mastered electronic telepathy, gestalt, fenestration, and the
other states of computer consciousness. Hanuman's eyes were
always fragile with the hollow, haunted look of someone who has
experienced too much computer interface, who has journeyed deep
into his computers' shin space, or into thoughtspace, memory
space or
481
meta space, perhaps even into the mythical godspace that the
cyber-shamans were said to seek with an almost religious
devotion. In truth, Danlo was afraid that Hanuman's essential
religiousness had been transfigured into his love of
computers. Perhaps, Danlo thought, he would soon be initiated
into the secret grades of the cyber-shamans; perhaps Hanuman's
masters would implant biochips in his brain and he would face
his computers continually, and thus become an outlawed
neurosinger.
  'Let's discuss computers some other time,' Hanuman said. 'If
we don't start for the joyance soon, we'll be the last to
arrive.'
 They turned off the Serpentine, then, skating down narrow
glidderies closed to all sled traffic. They cut across a
district of cafes, imprinting shops, libraries and fine old
apartment buildings wrought of black and pink granite. Rich
emigrees and the professionals of the Order, mostly, lived in
these apartments, each of which had its own private multrum and
fireplace. The air was sweet with the smell of woodsmoke and
flowers. Everywhere Danlo looked, there were flowers: snow
dahlia and sapphire blossoms and fireflowers of crimson and
gold. Each apartment's outer window sills were hung with flower
planters, and the explosion of colours drew Danlo's sight
outward and up to the sky.
 The blessed Ring is growing, he thought as he gazed at the
heavens. In places, the sky above Neverness was tinged with a
pale golden fire, a growing cloud of gases and new life that
only the brightest of stars could burn through. Five times, he
remembered, he had journeyed to the stars he could not see. And
he had never discussed these journeys with Hanuman. He had
never talked about the torison spaces that twist like black
worms through the manifold, nor the beautiful mathematics of
the Great Theorem, nor his dread at being lost in an infinite
loop, nor his joy at passing through the number storm and
entering into dreamtime. (The computer-generated dreamtime of
the
 482
pilots, that is.) He had never told Hanuman a secret that the
pilots had discovered: as the Golden Ring grew and spread
outward into the nearspace above their planet, it was somehow
distorting that very space. Some kind of life within the Ring,
perhaps some vast and marvellous god evolved from one of the
myriad kinds of newly created organisms, was twisting the
superluminal fabric from which the manifold is woven. Making it
knottier, more complex. And it was tearing open rents in the
manifold, creating new windows that pilots map their lightships
through when they fall from star to star, or from point to
point in the neighbourhood of a star. Someday, perhaps even the
great thickspace near Neverness's yellow sun might curl onto
itself. The thickspace – an infinite density of point-sources
where pathways from every star in the galaxy converge – might
be lost into a hideous complexity of knots impossible for
pilots to map. And then Neverness would no longer be the
topological nexus of the galaxy. The City of Light would be cut
off from the stars, and that was a secret Danlo must not tell
anyone, not even his best friend.
  'Look,' Hanuman called out. He and Danlo had just crossed
the Old City Glissade and had turned onto a purple street lined
with yu trees and grand old houses. He stretched out an
orange-gloved hand and pointed. 'Bardo's house. Hideous, isn't
it?'
 'Hideous,' Danlo agreed. 'But splendid, too.' The house stood
on the east side of the gliddery, and it was much the largest
on the block. Three thousand years earlier the Order had built
the main body of the house along classic lines of laser-cut
granite, long clary windows and beautifully grained woods:
jewood and Japanese cherry and shatterwood beams rubbed with
scented waxes. As with the other nearby houses, various
ambassadors had lived there until the Order moved all such
farsiders to the Street of Embassies. And then, during Ricardo
Lavi's lordship, the north and south wings of the house had
been
 483
added to provide rooms for journeymen unable to find dormitory
space within the Academy's walls. This was at the beginning of
the Order's Golden Age when women and men from the Civilized
Worlds were coming to Neverness in swarms. It was a time of
enthusiasms, caprice and reckless technologies. The wings of
Bardo's house had, in fact, been grown organically. Tiny robots
the size of bacteria had assembled its structures atom by atom,
bit by bit, a seamless pattern of diamond and crewel and
organic stone. Viewed from the street, the house looked
something like a huge, fantastic insect: the main body of
natural stone, grey and solid, and the organic stone wings
stived with bits of colour, with filaments and streaks of
cinnabar, orchid pink and amethyst. The two wings swept upward
and out, north and south for fifty yards along the street, and
they seemed as lacy and delicate as feather ice, almost
impossibly delicate, as if the aretes and arches and points
might crumble beneath any sudden wind. But they were strong
enough, as all works of organic stone are. Originally, two
hundred and fifty-six windowpanes of spun diamond had graced
the rooms of either wing. Only a few of these panes remained
however, the rest having been sold off over the centuries, or
stolen. As Danlo stood gazing at the splendid octagonal
windows, the way the low evening light fell upon the diamond
sheets and broke into showers of colour, he found himself
wishing that the Order hadn't abolished all assembler
technology. Only a few houses in the Old City – those built
between the years 620 and 694 – displayed this kind of
stonework, and that was too bad.
 'I never thought Bardo would return,' Hanuman said.
'I always ... hoped he would.'
'Do you have your invitation?'
 'Yes, right here.' Danlo held the steel invitation in the
palm of his hand, and he flashed it at Hanuman.
 'Please promise me,' Hanuman said, 'that you'll think
carefully before embracing any of the joys of Bardo's house.'
484
  'Only if you will promise to forget you are a cetic for
tonight and enjoy yourself.'
'Oh, very well,' Hanuman said. 'I promise.'
'Then so do I.'
 'Then let's go inside. There's supposed to be a gatekeeper to
take our invitations.'
  So saying, they skated off the street and up the walkway to
Bardo's new house.
 485



CHAPTER SIXTEEN

The Way of the Serpent

This brings us to the Yoga concept of the Kundalini or the
snake as an image of inner strength. Kundalini is represented
symbolically as a snake coiled up upon itself in the form of a
ring (kundala), in that subtle part of the organism
corresponding to the lower extremity of the spinal column;
this, at any rate, is the case with ordinary man. But, as a
result of exercises directed toward his spiritualization –
Hatha Yoga, for instance – the snake uncoils and stretches up
through wheels corresponding to the various plexuses of the
body until it reaches the area of the forehead corresponding
to the third eye of Shiva. It is then, according to Hindu
belief, that man recovers his sense of the eternal.
 – from A Dictionary of Symbols, by Juan Eduardo Cirlot

 Around the grounds of Bardo's house was a metal fence, a cruel
construction of iron spears set upright into a stone border.
Danlo had heard a rumour that Bardo sometimes kept an inner,
light fence around his house; but since the possession of
lasers was reason for banishment from the City, he thought the
rumour must be untrue. The gate of the fence was open, and
Danlo and Hanuman stopped to hand their invitations to the
gatekeeper, a bouncy little man with happy eyes and the
aggressively ragged look of an autist. He said, 'You're late,
honoured journeymen, but welcome, welcome – the remembrance
will soon begin.' They bowed and continued up the walkway, past
intricate ice sculptures, shih trees and lawns of snow blooms.
Despite the gatekeeper's words, Danlo skated slowly and
486
easily, enjoying the fall of evening. The air smelled of
flowers and had a quality of lightness that aroused in him
feelings both of anticipation and dread. The sounds of
laughter, clinking glasses and strange musics spilled out
around him. Attached to the front of the house, where the
shatterwood doors of the entranceway opened to the outside, was
a large veranda, or rather, a stone and mortar warming pavilion
packed with people. Danlo and Hanuman ejected their skate
blades and pushed into the throng. They bowed to various
masters of the Order and to hibakusha, and to spelists, and
even to the merchant-princes in their gem-studded jackets.
Everywhere Danlo looked, he saw people drinking ice wine or
skotch or jambool, or smoking toalache. All kinds of people:
wormrunners and harijan, poets and phantasts, and even two
beautiful courtesans who were highly placed in the Society of
Courtesans. It seemed that Bardo had invited a third of the
City to his joyance, but it was not so. Other than Hanuman,
there were no cetics to be seen; there were few astriers and
very few Architects. One might have thought that scryers would
attend any celebration of memory (these eyeless prophets
sometimes call their visions 'memories of the future') but
Bardo mistrusted scryers and kept them away.
  Because it was almost too noisy to talk, Danlo lightly
touched the sleeve of Hanuman's robe to draw his attention.
Using the cetic hand language that Hanuman had taught him, he
signed: Let's find Bardo and wish him well.
 They went into the house, following a stream of people
through the entrance hall and into a large, richly decorated
sun room. Bardo had returned from his journeys with the finest
of gosharps, Yarkona furniture, Darghinni sculptures, tondos
and paintings and crewel work. And Fravashi carpets, of course,
and too many sense boxes. Danlo was surprised that mantelets,
fones, sulki grids and other kinds of forbidden technology were
so openly displayed, hanging from the walls or sitting atop
shiny lacquered tables. But then, Bardo was an open, expansive
man who liked to
487
 flaunt his way of living, however excessive or careless. It
amused Danlo to see twenty-three bonsai trees lined up in front
of the sun room's diamond windows. The leaves of the trees
looked sickly and yellowish-green, as if Bardo were still
giving them too much water.
 Hanuman caught Danlo's eye and said, 'I've heard that
sometimes Bardo doesn't greet his guests until just before the
midnight remembrance.'
 'Then perhaps we should take our supper,' Danlo said. 'Have
you eaten?'
'I'm not hungry,' Hanuman said.
  'Will you excuse me, then? I cannot bear the smells of all
these foods.'
 Danlo, who was always hungry and always ate enough for three
men, wandered off to see what delicacies he might discover. At
the far end of the room, a long table had been set with stacks
of clary plates, chopsticks, wine goblets and many platters of
food. There were pepper nuts, curried vegetables, cheeses,
grilled tombu, mounds of glittering red salmon roe and cultured
meats. And baldo nuts, sliced snow apples, bloodfruit in cream,
breads and a dozen kinds of fairy food. Danlo squeezed between
a shivering autist and a beautiful, black-skinned woman whom he
recognized as the diva, Nirvelli. He helped himself to a plate
of steaming kurmash. He stood there gobbling these exquisitely
hot nut grains as he looked about the room. Nirvelli wasn't the
only famous person there. He saw Zohra Bey, and Moriah li Chen,
and Thomas Sonderval, the Sonderval, raimented in a rather
dandyish robe (which he had designed himself) and in his vast
and brilliant arrogance. Danlo was wondering if he should
introduce himself to this pilot of pilots when something caused
him to look back across the room. There, standing next to
Hanuman, wearing the silk pyjamas of a courtesan, was the most
beautiful woman that he had ever seen.
  'Losharu shona!' Danlo whispered to himself. 'Losharu
halla!'
488
 He stared at her, much too openly, and his eyes burned
because he could not blink them, and his heart pounded with the
thrill of shooting adrenalin. For much too long he remained
frozen there, like an animal of the forest watching another. He
forgot that he was holding a plate of kurmash in his hand. He
let the plate tilt and little yellow-brown kernels rolled off,
fell and bounced against the marble floor. His hunger – the
empty, contracting hunger in his belly for food – was suddenly
gone. The loveliness of this young courtesan struck like a
lightning bolt to his core and burned him inside. He loved, all
in a moment, everything about her: the graceful way she moved
her hands when she talked; her easy, natural smile; and above
all, her pure animal vitality. She was tall and voluptuous and
smoothly-muscled like an ice dancer. Her face was unique and
memorable, though he was dimly aware that no single feature
seemed to go very well with any other. Her lips were a shade
too red, too full, too sensuous against the creaminess of her
skin. She had a long, imperious nose set between high
cheekbones and thick blonde hair, and Japanesque eyes,
intelligent and lively, as dark and liquid as coffee. Her
entire face stood out prominently, almost prognathously, an
atavism that hinted of something deeply primitive in her. Danlo
found this primitive quality instantly compelling. A part of
him wondered if he would later see her in a different light,
but now other parts were burning with a need far beyond wonder.
His chest was hot and tight, his eyes were afire with the sight
of her and his hands ached to touch her splendid face.
Halla is the woman who shines like the sun, he thought.
  She looked at him, then. She turned her head and looked past
all the bright, chattering people standing between them. She
looked straight at him, boldly and openly. Their eyes met and
locked together, and there was a shock of instant recognition,
as if they had known each other for a billion years. Danlo felt
himself falling into her eyes, and the world about him
narrowed, intensified and
489
 stopped altogether. He knew he had never seen her before, yet
his eyes burned with this electric and ancient connection. His
lips burned, and his fingers, and his blood; everything about
him was afire with a sudden knowingness that swept his breath
away and astonished him.
 'Excuse me,' he said when he had finally recovered his voice.
Next to him stood a thin, amused-looking woman dressed in a
gaudy silver gown. He had spilled his kurmash over her silver
slippers. Without taking his eyes away from his lovely
courtesan, he mumbled, 'Excuse me, would you mind holding my
plate ... for a moment?'
  He pushed the plate into the woman's hands, bowed
perfunctorily, and walked off. He fairly flew across the room.
He came right up to Hanuman and the courtesan, and all the
while his eyes never left hers.
 Hanuman smiled at him, but he scarcely noticed. He scarcely
heard Hanuman say, 'Danlo, may I present Tamara Ten Ashtoreth?
Tamara, this is the friend I was telling you about, Danlo wi
Soli Ringess.'
 Danlo bowed to her, and then he forgot all his manners. He
reached out and grasped her hand, which was gloved in blue
silk. He held her hand gently and he immediately wished he
could pull off his black leather gloves, the better to touch
her long fingers with his own. 'You are beautiful!' he gasped
out. 'I have never seen anyone ... so beautiful.'
  This outburst caused Tamara to smile, a wide and lovely
smile that broke over her face like the sun. She was much too
accomplished and poised to return his compliment, in words, but
her eyes were full of light and laughter, and an openness that
said: 'You are very beautiful, too.'
'Is this your first joyance?' Danlo asked.
 'I've attended two others,' Tamara said. Her voice was clear
and strong and lovely to hear. 'Bardo has invited courtesans to
each of his joyances. Everyone says he's trying to convert our
Society.'
  Danlo let go her hands and said, 'Could it be that Bardo
just likes to surround himself with beautiful women?'
490
  'I'm sure he must have many reasons for what he does,'
Tamara said. 'But he's your friend, isn't he? I'm sure you must
know his intentions.'
 'No, I have not seen him for five years. People change, don't
they?'
  'Everyone is calling Bardo a religious man,' Tamara said.
There was a wariness and irony in her voice. 'I do think he's a
charismatic man. He has a very great passion, which has
impressed us all. But a passion for what? He seems devoted to
remembrancing the Elder Eddas. He seems involved with unfolding
the racial memories. I've only recently met him – has he always
displayed such a passion for the possibilities of his memory
and his mind?'
 'The Bardo that I knew,' Danlo said, and he was suddenly
laughing, 'had a passion for other parts of himself. Other ...
possibilities, yes?'
 'I think I know what you mean,' Tamara said. She, too, began
to laugh. They stood there facing each other, looking into each
other's eyes, and laughing.
  Here Hanuman coughed and cleared his throat as he shot Danlo
a cold look. It was he who had engaged Tamara in conversation,
a significant feat considering that she was a courtesan and he
only a journeyman cetic; he coughed and looked askance at
Danlo's instant infatuation. He said, 'It should be obvious
that Bardo is trying to convert the courtesans. If I wanted to
influence the Order to accept a new religion, that's what I
would do.'
 'I'm sure you overestimate our importance,' Tamara said.
'Do I?'
 'Our Society has never had a formal connection to the Order.'
'Which is why your influence has been so pervasive.'
 Tamara smiled, and then, in her lovely, musical voice, she
said, 'But our purpose, as everyone knows, is pleasure, not
politics. I detest politics.'
'Many voluptuaries say that,' Hanuman coughed out.
491
'And then, when they're older – well, you know what the
masters say, don't you?'
'No, I don't think I do.'
'They say this: "Find a paramour, lose your soul."'
 Again, Tamara laughed, and she smiled at Hanuman. 'You're a
cynical man, I think. I've been taught that our Society was
founded precisely to keep men from losing their souls.'
  The Society of Courtesans, in fact, had been founded in the
year 1018 as an investment cooperative designed to protect the
fortunes of a few dozen women who were extraordinarily skilled
in their arts of ecstasy. And to protect their lives. When the
newly formed Society of Courtesans began buying property in the
Farsider's Quarter and conducting the finances of their art
themselves, they had severed all connection with their
procurers and pimps. In revenge, these violent, cruel and
parasitical men had beaten them, and sometimes even tortured
them with nerve knives that caused their beautiful bodies to
convulse and spasm. More than one courtesan had died this way.
And so the first courtesans pooled their money to hire
assassins. The assassins exterminated the procurers, of course,
and then betrayed the very women who had hired them. They
demanded three-quarters of the Society's yearly profits – or
else they would assassinate the courtesans one by one. This
tribute was a far greater bite of their wealth than their
procurers had ever taken, and the courtesans decided not to pay
it. Instead, they sent their most accomplished diva – her name
was Natasha Urit – to the planet Qallar. There, Natasha made an
infamous pact with the warrior-poets. In exchange for the
warrior-poets' murderous services, the courtesans promised to
consider the strange religion of Qallar, and if possible, to
help subvert the masters and lords of the Order. This was a
time when the warrior-poets were proselytizing all across the
Civilized Worlds, as well as murdering for the sheer joy of
living closer to death and life. The warrior-poets desired
492
 to bring all peoples to an intenser experience of life,
especially the Order academicians, who valued only their vast
knowledge and their minds. Natasha Urit promised to introduce
young courtesans to the men of the Order, that they might ply
their art and open the academicians' hearts to new realms of
experience. Pleasure was their key to this opening, and over
two millennia, the courtesans had learned all there was to know
about pleasure. Long after the warrior-poets had murdered every
assassin in Neverness, long after their proselytizing zeal had
faded and they dissolved their pact with the courtesans, the
courtesans kept alive the flame of the warrior-poets'
teachings. And they maintained a special relationship with the
Order. Over time, the Society grew and evolved, but they
continued to train their novices in the arts of tantra, sex
dancing, music, maithuna and bodywork. And their novices,
century after century, matured and ripened into voluptuaries
who enraptured any young Orderman who could afford one. And the
voluptuaries grew old, and they returned their bodies to youth,
and they became the paramours of masters and old lords who had
learned to love them. The Order had long forbidden pilots and
other professionals to marry, and so in place of wives, they
took paramours into their arms. Some of these paramours even
bore children, illegitimately, illegally. Some of the most
famous lords acquired money and kept their families in secret
splendour. They listened too well to the counsel of their
paramours, and they lost their independence, if not their
souls. But the best of the courtesans, whether paramour, diva
or voluptuary, continued to practise their art for only the
highest of reasons.
 'If our Society really wanted to influence the Order,' Tamara
said, and she smiled at Hanuman, 'we'd train men to please your
women. Almost half your professionals are women.'
 'That's true,' Hanuman said, 'but seven of ten lords are men.'
493
 Danlo brushed the hair away from his eyes and looked at
Tamara. He almost had to shout to make himself heard above the
music and the many ringing voices. 'Could you really do that –
train men to please women?'
In answer, Tamara laughed softly and nodded her head.
  'I should think that's the secret of their art,' Hanuman
said. 'What better way to enrapture a man than by exciting his
vanity?'
'I'm afraid you don't really understand,' Tamara said.
 For a while Hanuman and Tamara bantered with each other like
two novices slapping a hokkee puck back and forth. Hanuman
stared at her uneasily, his eyes hooded yet intense. He
affected the manner of a young journeyman who can't afford a
courtesan's arts: he seemed full of awe, resentment, guilt and
ill-concealed desire. But he was partly playing at these
emotions, as cetics often do. Most likely he was trying to
manipulate Tamara in subtle ways, perhaps to crack her dazzling
surface charm in order to show the love-blind Danlo a facet of
her he might otherwise not have seen.
  But Tamara was as imperturbable as a diamond and despite
Hanuman's manipulations and veiled attacks, she continued to
smile and sparkle. 'When you've become a full cetic,' she told
Hanuman, 'I'm sure you'll find a courtesan who will teach you
the greatest of all pleasures.'
'Do I dare ask what that would be?'
'I think you already know,' Tamara said.
 Hanuman let loose a hollow laugh, and then said, 'Yes, I'm a
cetic, and I'm supposed to discern such things.'
  There was a long silence, which Danlo broke by asking, 'And
what is the greatest of all pleasures?'
 'The giving of pleasure, of course,' Tamara said. She looked
at Danlo, then at Hanuman. Though some men have always found
their greatest pleasure in the giving of pain.'
  These words obviously caught Hanuman unprepared. His face
fell crimson, for a moment, and he seemed out-
494
raged, hurt, shamed. It was a rare thing for him to betray such
emotion. 'You should know, Danlo, that courtesans are very
skilled with their tongues. They've much to teach – even a
cetic could learn from them.'
'You're very gracious,' Tamara said. Thank you.'
 'However there's so much to learn, and so few nights in which
to learn it,' Hanuman said. He bowed to Tamara and smiled his
frozen cetic's smile. 'And on this night we've come to learn
remembrancing, Danlo and I. We should excuse ourselves and pay
our respects to Bardo.'
 Again, he bowed, deeply, a shade too deeply for the occasion.
He turned to Danlo and said, 'I wonder if he's grown fatter
these last five years?'
  Danlo knew he should make his goodbyes and find Bardo, but
something in Tamara's dark, lustrous eyes seized his muscles
and held him motionless.
'Danlo?'
 Hanuman's soft, too-restrained voice fell among the hundred
other voices in the room, and Danlo scarcely noticed that he
had spoken.
'Are you coming?'
  'Not yet,' Danlo finally said. 'Why don't you tell Bardo I
am waiting to wish him well. I shall find you ... later.'
 His eyes were still fixed on Tamara's, so he did not see the
look of fury that burned across Hanuman's face. It never
occurred to him then that Hanuman might instantly have loved
Tamara, even as he loved her. In truth, he never suspected that
Hanuman was capable of such a purely self-consuming emotion.
  After Hanuman had sulked out of the room, Danlo shook his
head, and to Tamara he admitted, 'Sometimes he likes to hurt
people, truly. But I cannot see why he would want to hurt you.'
  Someone nudged Danlo from behind, causing him to step closer
to Tamara. The long room was now quite full of people. The air
was hot and steamy from the heat of a hundred bodies. Many were
smoking triya seeds in little
495
 wooden pipes. The pop-pip-pop of the tiny seeds was
everywhere, and plumes of purplish smoke unfolded like satin
gauze and veiled over the room's three chandeliers. This smoke
stung Danlo's eyes, and breathing it exhilarated him. He looked
at Tamara, standing beneath Bardo's glass chandelier. The
thousands of glass pendants were incandescent with electricity,
of all things. Electric light spilled down over Tamara's head
and covered her in soft violet tones. Danlo thought she looked
like a statue of the goddesses they sculpt on Gemina. Then she
moved closer to him, and her dancer's muscles played beneath
her violet-blue pyjamas, and Danlo was very aware that she was
a living creature of flesh and blood and sweet, hot breath.
  'Sometimes I think the courtesans and cetics are too much
alike,' Tamara said. 'We're both too aware of the power of
words.'
 Danlo was now so close to her that he could feel the moisture
in her breath; he could talk without raising his voice. 'I have
heard that courtesans are accomplished in the art of
conversation.'
  'Conversation is the third greatest pleasure,' Tamara said.
'I have ... never spoken with a courtesan before.'
 Tamara smiled at him and said, 'And I've never known anyone
like you before.'
'But you know ... about me, yes?'
  'Hanuman told me how you came to Neverness. That you had to
eat dogs to stay alive. I think he's a little in awe of you.'
'Did he tell you how I was born? Where I was born?'
  'I've heard the stories,' Tamara said. 'It can't be easy
being the son of Mallory Ringess.'
  'Oh, that is not so hard,' Danlo said. This is what is hard:
living in a city where people can worship a man who has become
a god.'
'I think the people in all cities are very much the same.'
496
  'All civilized people, yes. But other peoples have ... other
ways.'
 She looked at him in instant understanding and asked, 'Are
you speaking of the Alaloi people?'
'Yes.'
  'But could you ever return to the Alaloi tribes? To their
way of life?'
  Danlo rubbed his forehead and touched the feather in his
hair. 'I have never told anyone, but I have often dreamed of
going back.'
'Because the Alaloi live more simply than we do?'
  'No, it is not that. At least, it is not just the
simplicity. All my life, it seems, I have been looking for a
kind of beauty that I call halla. Halla, it is ... the harmony
of all life. The way all things are connected, the web, the way
each thing becomes purely itself only in relation to all other
things. Once or twice when I was a child, on quiet nights when
the stars came out... I have a memory of this kind of beauty.'
  Tamara touched his hand, then; she reached down between them
where her pyjamas nearly touched the kamelaika covering his
thigh, and she wrapped her long fingers around his. 'I listened
to a recording of one of the Alaloi dialects a few years ago,'
she said. 'I thought it was a beautiful language.'
'Are you a student of languages?'
  'I think I've imprinted fourteen languages and learned the
long way three others.'
  Tamara, like many courtesans, preferred to converse with her
clients in their milk tongues, and she did so whenever she
could. Those familiar with their talents sometimes refer to
courtesans – usually with snide double-meaning – as linguists.
 'Do you remember much of ... the Alaloi language?' Danlo
asked.
'No, but I love to hear it spoken.'
Danlo squeezed Tamara's fingers. She was standing quite
497
 close to him, almost eye to eye. He drank in the clean smell
of her hair, and he looked at her and said, 'Halla los li
devani ki-charara li pelafi nis ni manse.'
'But what does that mean?'
  'It means: halla is the woman who lights the blessed fire
inside a man.'
 Tamara laughed in open delight and beamed a smile at him.
'You're a beautiful man, and I like talking with you. But it's
well that you didn't say that when your friend was here. He's
very jealous of you, I think.'
'Hanuman ... jealous?'
  Tamara nodded her head and sighed. 'I think he was about to
propose a contract when you interrupted us.'
  'But he is a journeyman – does your Society make contracts
with journeymen?'
  'No, my Society doesn't. But some journeymen – I hope I'm
not insulting anyone – despite their vows, some young men keep
money. Some courtesans make secret contracts with them.'
'They do this to enrich themselves, yes?'
 'To enrich themselves at our Society's expense. Of course,
these courtesans are punished when they're found out, but it
still happens.'
  'I do not know how Hanuman could have got money,' Danlo
said.
  'It doesn't really matter,' Tamara said. 'I'm afraid I would
have had to disappoint him, money or not.'
 'A woman as beautiful as you ... must make many contracts.'
  'My Society has appointed me contracts the next fifteen
nights.'
 Danlo pulled his hands away from hers and carelessly ungloved
himself. He stuck his gloves in his pants pocket. Then he
reached out and gently grasped her hands, and he stripped off
her tight silk gloves. Around the middle finger of her left
hand, she wore a gold ring cast in the form of a snake biting
its tail, but he scarcely noticed this.
498
He touched her long naked fingers, and the sudden shock of skin
pressing hot skin delighted him. He looked at her, and he said,
quite boldly, 'But you have made no contracts for tonight?'
 'No,' she said, 'not for tonight.' She wove her fingers
between his and smiled.
'I have never had ... any money,' Danlo said.
'Is that what you've thought to give me?'
  'Money is just a symbol, yes?' Danlo said. 'It is
meaningless as a gift. If I could give you anything ... it
would be a pearl, to wear around your neck. Have you ever seen
a pearl of the palpulve oysters? They are splendid and rare.'
'Oh, Danlo, you shouldn't promise what's impossible.'
'But what can I give you?'
  In answer Tamara pulled his hands close to her body so that
they brushed the lower part of her belly. 'You're so
beautiful,' she said. 'I've never made a contract with a man
just for the sake of beauty.'
  He laughed, then, easily and gladly, as he sometimes did
when he was overwhelmed with pure delight. His laughter,
falling out in the middle of a room where tens of people were
smoking psychedelic triya seeds and also laughing, might have
gone unnoticed, but then Tamara was laughing too, and their
obvious passion for each other attracted many stares. At that
moment, however, Danlo had no care for anyone other than
Tamara.
  They locked eyes together, and it was as if they were the
only truly alive people in the room, possibly in the universe.
There came a sudden knowing of each other's minds and hearts:
they both thought it was intensely funny that they could stand
there in open sight of many others, touching hands and falling
into love. This knowingness was intensely real, more real even
than the musky smell of Tamara's perfume or his own acrid
sweat. It drew him into a brilliant and wild future that he
could see forming even as he looked into her lovely eyes.
'We should be alone together,' he said.
499
  'I think that would be best,' she said. She stroked the
palms of his hands and pulled at his fingers. 'I keep a house
up near North Beach – we could go there.'
'That is too far. It would take too long to get there.'
  She laughed and then said, 'But where else could we go?'
 'I have heard that there are thirty sleeping chambers in this
house,' he swept his arms out and smiled. This time of night,
they cannot all be taken.'
'You propose we begin our contract, here? Now?'
'Yes, why not?'
 'That would be rash,' she said. There's no way to make
preparations.'
  Danlo winced, inwardly, at the word 'preparations'. Many
times since entering Borja, he had seduced the Order's young
women; many times, the more adventurous akashics or holists or
scryers or even other pilots had seduced him. And each time
before their love play these lovely women had diligently made
their preparations. Each of them had worn a pessary, artificial
tissues that lined the vagina and protected against pregnancy
and disease. How he loathed the gelid, alienating feel of these
tissues! But civilized women feared contagion almost as much as
death, and so they did what they could to quarantine their
bodies and safeguard themselves. Indeed, many women and men
renounced swiving altogether in favour of other forms of sex.
Journeymen of all professions were supposed to satisfy
themselves with masturbation or simulation. Although Danlo was
quite aware of civilized customs, he disdained both these
alternatives as shaida acts that could only lead him to false
ecstasy. Both acts required the infusion of the brain with
images – whether the false images of pure fantasy or the
totally compelling images and sensa of a computer-generated
surreality, it did not matter. Danlo craved real copulation as
much as he craved life, and he sought such love play whenever
he could.
'Let's be rash, then,' he said to Tamara.
500
'Are you so eager to be the father of a child?'
'Is that to be the result of our contract?'
 'Do you want it to be?' she asked. Danlo touched her long
hair, then said, 'I had heard that courtesans have an awareness
of their fertility. That they can control their own fertility,
yes?'
'Some of us master these skills, that's true.'
 'Then you must know if tonight... is a dangerous time for
you.'
  'Oh, it's dangerous,' she said. 'It's always dangerous,
isn't it?'
'But how dangerous?'
 'Shall I calculate the probabilities for you?' she asked. She
smiled, and it was obvious this whole conversation amused her.
There's only a very slight chance we'd conceive a child
together tonight.'
  'If we did,' he said, 'I could quit the Order and we could
make a marriage contract together.'
  At this, she laughed for a long time before saying, 'You
shouldn't promise what you're not ready to do.'
 'But I might want to marry you anyway – I promised myself
this the instant I saw you.'
 'You have a sweet tongue,' she said, 'but let's not speak of
marriage right now.'
'Should we speak of love?'
'No, that would be even worse.'
 'Then let's not speak at all,' he said. 'Let's be rash ...
together.'
  He touched her forehead, and his fingers knew an instant and
intense thrill. He touched her eyes, her cheek, her long neck,
and then the primal urge of life toward more life caught them
both, as in a firestorm, and she said, 'All right.'
  Hand in hand, they made their way from the room. They
squeezed past many women: a harijan poet whose old, gnarly face
he vaguely recognized; the fat wife of a merchant-prince; a
thin toalache addict with her burnt-out
501
 but intelligent eyes. Danlo was so enraptured, he found
something to love in each of them. All women were beautiful, he
thought, and he told himself that he could make a marriage with
almost anyone, if he were ever free to marry. He told himself
this even as he walked through brilliant rooms full of
brilliant people, deeper into Bardo's house. They passed into a
great hall of high arches and long windows, and then up a
flight of stairs into the north wing. Here the skylights were
clear diamond panes and the walls glittering sweeps of organic
stone. Guest rooms lined both sides of the corridor; the doors
of each room – slabs of plain jewood polished with lemon wax –
were closed. Danlo chose a door at random, glanced at Tamara,
and then rapped his knuckles across the gleaming, resonant
wood. The sound of his knocking seemed very loud and cracked
out along the corridor. When there was no answer, he opened the
door. He saw immediately that someone had used the room that
night: the windows were open and in the fireplace the embers of
a dying fire glowed and hissed. The room smelled of lemons and
triya seeds and the essence of snow dahlia blowing in from
Bardo's lawn, good smells that drew him quickly inside. He was
smiling and laughing and pulling at Tamara's arm, and then he
kicked the door closed, and there were other wonderful smells:
that of woodsmoke and fresh new furs and the thickness of
Tamara's hair. He liked everything about the room, although it
was so dark at first that he could see little of it. There were
the lovely diamond windows, of course, and clothes chests
inlaid with rare woods. Low, lacquered tables were set out with
pipes and little bowls of triya seeds, and with decanters of
wine, and boxes of black toalache, and with half a dozen other
drugs that might be snuffed or smoked or drunk. Near the
fireplace was a huge futon covered with shagshay furs. He stood
over this futon, looking for Tamara's eyes in the darkness. He
was still holding her hand, and he pulled her closer so that he
could see her face.
502
'Let's breathe together,' she said.
   She kissed him then, touched his lips with hers. He had
never kissed a woman before; the Alaloi do not practise this
art, nor do most of the civilized peoples. He found the play of
mouth against mouth and quick slipping tongues to be strange
but very exciting. In truth, the unexpected pleasure of it
shocked him and left him breathless. She pressed up close to
him, and their bodies moulded together. Her silk pyjamas rubbed
against his kamelaika. The friction of silk against wool rubbed
off surface electrons from the molecules of either fabric and
electrified their garments. When he unzipped her pyjamas and
pulled them off her, crackles of blue and green electricity ran
along the silken folds, then died into the room's darkness.
There was some difficulty getting his kamelaika off, not
because of the little shocks of static electricity that tickled
his hands, but because it was very tight and his muscles were
swollen with blood. At last, however, they were naked together,
kissing and clutching each other with abandon. She ran her
fingers along his membrum, and she gasped in surprise as she
touched the hard little scars that had been cut there during
his passage into manhood. They stood there for a long time as
they stroked and rubbed against each other. Then she pulled him
down atop her, and they sank into the furs covering the futon.
They swived each other furiously, pushing and panting and
sweating and moaning in delight. She was in her first youth,
only a couple of years older than he, and she was as strong and
wild as any animal. His hands were beneath her, and he felt the
muscles bunching along her back and buttocks, her anus a hard
ring of muscle coiled like a snake. Because she wore no
pessary, the deep clutching of her vulva around him was direct
and intense, a silky, heavenly slickness that drew him on and
on. They moved together, in rhythm and rapture, and he couldn't
tell where his body ended and hers began. It was as if the
cells of his body loved the cells of hers, or rather,
remembered them from some ecstatic union long ago and
503
were at last returning home. She gasped and wrapped her hands
around his back and pulled him deep into an exploding joy,
deeper into the supreme risk of life. There was a moment of
total surrender and dying to himself, as if he were only an
atom of consciousness completing some universal plan. And then
he suddenly cried out and shuddered, and there was true union,
a true returning. They cried out together in their ecstasy, and
he wanted to go on and on forever, but the pleasure of passion
had grown into agony and he had to stop.
 They lay there awhile, panting and joined to each other in
exhaustion. Then the air streaming in the window chilled the
sweat on their bodies and drove them beneath the furs. He asked
her if she would like a fire, and she said 'yes', and so he got
up and threw some logs on the glowing embers and poked about
until the fireplace was full of crackling orange flames. Soon
it was too hot for the furs, and they kicked them off. They
held each other and lay naked before the fire. They talked
about little things, such as the fine weather the City was
enjoying and the excellence of the foods that Bardo served. And
then their conversation grew more serious. Danlo told her of
his reasons for coming to Neverness; he tried to explain why he
had become friends with Hanuman li Tosh. But he was really
better at listening than talking, and most of the time he gazed
at Tamara and nodded his head attentively while she spoke of
her stultified childhood as an astrier and her later initiation
into the courtesan arts. As he discovered, she had a brilliant
mind. In fact, she might have entered the Order and become a
cetic or a remembrancer but her parents, as good astriers and
Architects, had denied her a formal education. And so, while
still quite young, she had left her home and applied to the
Society of Courtesans. She had become an accomplished
voluptuary; indeed, many said she was destined to become a
diva. She had applied her mind and the intelligence of all her
senses toward one end: the awakening of herself and others to a
504
greater intensity of life. It soon became clear, from her
manner and the way she looked at Danlo, that what she loved
most about him was his wildness (or rashness) and his own
burning love of life.
 'You're still hot,' she said as she touched his face. She
nibbed his chest, and then ran her fingers through the black
hair of his belly and pubes until she touched the little white
pearl of liquid beading up on the tip of his membrum. She
touched the naked bulb, softly, and the many scars running
along the shaft. She rested her head on his chest, staring down
at him as she fingered the round, shiny, blue and red scars.
'It must have hurt to have had these affixed,' she said.
  Danlo thought of the night he had lain on his back beneath
the stars while Three-Fingered Soli cut him, and he said, 'Yes
... it hurt.'
'Do all the Alaloi decorate themselves this way?'
'Only the men.'
 'How strange,' she said. 'Do they think it will stimulate the
women and give them more pleasure?'
'No, that is not the reason.'
'Then why do they do it?'
  Danlo stroked her hair and said, 'I do not mean to be
secretive, but I ... cannot tell you. That is, I may not.' In
truth, the twenty-ninth verse of the Song of Life told of the
cutting of a man's membrum, and he was forbidden to reveal this
knowledge to anyone. Although a part of him had long since cast
off his childhood beliefs, a deeper part whispered for him to
keep his silence.
'Do they think to desensitize themselves?' she asked.
'What do you mean?'
  'I've known a few men, mostly wormrunners – they have
themselves circumcized. The skin of the bulb then dries out,
which lessens the intensity of sensation. Or so they think.'
  Danlo clenched his jaws, then said, 'But why would anyone
want to be cut ... for that reason?'
505
 'Because they hope to prolong love play. To give the woman
time to reach her ecstasy, too.'
  'But such cutting does not prolong anything,' Danlo said. 'I
have been cut, as you can see – all Alaloi men have. Everyone
knows that men most often reach their ecstasy before women.'
'And leave us unsatisfied?'
  Danlo watched the firelight dance over her naked limbs, and
he traced his fingers over her hip. 'When we are still boys, we
are taught how to touch women to their ecstasy. If I had
reached my moment before you ... I would not have left you
unsatisfied.'
  She smiled and kissed his navel, and she said, There are
different intensities of satisfaction.'
 'That may be true,' he said, 'but the universe is made the
way it is, yes? Men are made the way they are. All male
animals. Have you ever seen a shagshay bull mount an ewe?'
'No, I really haven't.'
 'The entire copulation lasts less than ten seconds,' he said.
Ten ... thrusts, a little bellowing, and the bull is done.
Would you change all that is natural?'
 'Would you?' she asked. She looked at him and smiled, almost
as if she could read his thoughts. And then they both broke
into laughter.
 'I have often thought about this problem,' he said. 'Why
should the passions of a man and a woman be so out of joint?
And if we are both of us natural children of a ... natural
nature, isn't this proof that the whole universe is shaida?'
'Is shaida the opposite of halla?'
'Not precisely. Shaida is ... the left hand of halla.'
  'I see. You want to do only what's natural.' She sat up,
spine straight with her feet beneath her. She folded her left
hand over his right hand and squeezed it.
 After a while, he asked, 'Do you think a man should try to
forestall his ecstasy to match a woman's?'
506
 She touched the scar running across his forehead. She smiled
and said, 'Some men find that in forestalling their ecstasy,
they make it more intense. And then ecstasy is multiplied by
ecstasy – the possibilities between woman and man are said to
be infinite.'
  'I do not know how it could be any more intense,' he said.
 'I can't always match my passion with the quickness of
yours,' she said. 'And I wouldn't want to, even if I could.'
  'But how is it possible to forestall such a force? When
one's moment comes ... it is like stopping a star from
exploding.'
'Shall I show you how?'
'Could you do that?'
'It would be my pleasure,' she said.
  Again, she kissed his mouth, kissed his eyes, kissed his
body from his neck to his knees. And he kissed her. They spent
a long time, kissing and caressing, and then he moved to lie
atop her as before. But she pushed her hands against his chest
and eased him onto his back. She knelt over him, clenching his
dense chest hair in her fists as she settled atop him and
slipped back and forth. She did this not as an
ecstasy-forestalling technique, but because she was a courtesan
obeying her Society's rule of the alternation (and equality) of
sexual positions. In fact, it would have been easier for her to
apply these techniques with him atop her, but Tamara was not
one to break rules merely for the sake of expediency. She moved
back and forth, faster and faster, sliding and pressing down
against him with her loins. Danlo ached to thrust freely inside
her, to control the pace of their copulation. He was sweating
now and breathing quickly, and every part of him felt swollen
and overfull. He was dying to reach his moment and be done, he
was very close, and then suddenly she reached down behind her
and touched his stones, and pressed her fingers down into the
taut skin below them. She showed him the pressure points to
forestall his ecstasy.
507
She showed him how to breathe, and she cooled his surging blood
and his blind desire. Twice she did this, and each time she
allowed his passion to build to a greater intensity than he had
ever known before. At last, after a long while, she took pity
on him. Her fingers found other places on his body that urged
him straight into ecstasy. It began as a quickening of energy
that seemed to coil around the base of his spine, or rather,
uncoil, rapidly, filling his loins with a rare and marvellous
power. She, too, was full of this power, he could see it
flashing in her lustrous eyes. They looked at each other, and
something vast and vital passed back and forth between them,
eye to eye, hand to hand, cell to cell. Then she closed her
eyes and started rocking back and forth in frenzy, still
pressing him with her knees and her vulva and her artful
fingers. He was young and full of seed and the soft clasp of
her body was squeezing the liquid life out of him. He was now
too full of life; it burned like a river of fire inside him,
inside his belly, up to his heart, then behind his eyes. For a
moment, while he could still see, he looked up at her as she
threw back her head and gasped for air. Her eyes were tightly
closed, her face a mask of rapture glowing in the light of the
fire. And then he closed his eyes too, and the pressure in his
loins grew so intense that he cried out and clawed the muscles
along her thighs. There was a wild rush of energy, as of
lightning shooting along his spine from his hips to his head.
In this moment of pure, blinding joy he felt something
extraordinary completed between them. He emptied himself into
her in quick pulses of life, over and over until she fell
gasping against him and kissed his neck and pressed the side of
his head with hers. He lay there in utter exhaustion, with her
collapsed atop him, and he was utterly empty. And yet he was as
full as he had ever been, aware of all that was going on around
him. He heard voices from the deep parts of Bardo's house and
the wind against clear diamond panes; he was aware of
fireflowers opening in Bardo's garden, and the pungence of
triya seeds, and the
508
sweet smell of sex. Tamara's breath rushed in his ear, and her
heart beat next to his, and he was aware that he had never fell
so strong, so whole, so utterly alive. After a while they
rolled onto their sides. Gradually they passed back into a
normal, waking consciousness, and then into a conversational
consciousness. Tamara ran her fingers through his hair and
touched his white feather. She said, 'I've never known anyone
like you before.'
 'And I have never known ... anything before,' he said. There
is so much to know, isn't there?'
 She nodded her head and laughed. 'Some men practise with
courtesans for years before the serpent strikes them.'
'The ... serpent?'
  'Did you know we call our art "The Way of the Serpent"?'
  He grasped her hand and touched the ring coiled around her
middle finger. It was made in the form of a thick-bodied snake,
whose eyes were two tiny rubies set into gold. The snake's
mouth opened onto its tail, as if it were about to swallow
itself. This continuity of golden fang to golden flesh made a
perfect golden circle.
 'I noticed that you wear the ring of Ouroboros,' he said.
This is an ancient symbol, yes?'
'Then you do know about the serpent?'
  'Not really. That is, I have studied the religions and have
learned the meaning of their symbols. A few symbols. Ouroboros,
the serpent who swallows its own tail – this is a symbol of
nature itself, yes? The immortality of all things. The way life
lives off life, consumes itself, yet continues. The great
circle of life and consciousness, continually shedding death
like an old skin and being born anew.'
  Tamara looked back and forth between her ring and his eyes,
and she said, 'I think I like your interpretation better than
the one I was taught. It's simpler, more profound.'
 Danlo bowed his head and smiled. This symbol means something
different to you, yes?'
'Have you ever heard of the serpent called Kundalini?'
509
'No, I am not familiar with that name.'
'But you've heard of the tantric yoga?'
  Shaking his head back and forth, he said, 'We are taught
many yogas, of course. But not the tantric yoga.'
 'Tantra is the ancient name for this yoga,' she said. 'It's
the yoga of sex and energy, the life energies. Many of its
techniques have been incorporated into the other yogas.'
'And the courtesans are masters of this yoga?'
 'Not precisely,' she said. 'We have our art – it's been
evolving for a long time. Our practices differ, in many ways,
from the tantra. Our theories are different.'
'Is the Kundalini a theory or symbol, then?'
  'Both,' she said. 'In the ancient theory, the Kundalini
energy lies coiled around the base of the spine like a great
serpent. Various techniques are used to– '
  'I felt something like that!' Danlo said all at once. 'At
the base of my spine – only it was more like a twisted bolt of
lightning than a serpent.'
 'It is like lightning, once it's teased out of its sleep,'
she said. 'Once the serpent energy is awakened, it uncoils,
straightens and strikes the body like lightning. It pierces the
spinal cord and rushes upward through the chakras. Behind the
navel, there's a chakra, and the heart chakra, and– '
'These are the energy centres, yes?'
'How did you know?'
  He sat up and stared at the fire. He thought of his test and
trial in Lavi Square when the heat of lotsara had flared up
just behind his navel and had saved him from freezing to death.
He told Tamara about this, and then said, The Alaloi have their
theories, too.'
 'I would have thought your people were too busy just living
life to worry about awakening their chakras.'
  'Is that what the Kundalini does? Is that what courtesans
do?'
 She laughed and continued, 'I was telling you about the
ancient theory. In this theory, the Kundalini energy burns
510
its way up each of the seven chakras. Ideally, it burns through
them – sometimes the pathway is blocked, of course, by old
wounds to the body or mind, and the energy is trapped.'
'Like light in a bottle of stone?'
She nodded her head. 'If you like.'
 'There is no flow,' he said. 'No release, no ... connection.'
  'For most people, this is the way it is,' she said. 'But in
a few people, the Kundalini burns through the chakras one by
one. At last it bursts through the thousand-petalled lotus at
the crown of the head.'
  He was sitting crosslegged with his back to the fire,
listening and thinking. She came around behind him, then, and
pressed her hand against his tailbone where it rested in the
soft furs. She traced her fingers in sinuous waves up the naked
skin over his spine, then across the nape of his neck to the
top of his head. Her fingers danced through his thick hair and
sent shivers of pleasure across his scalp.
'And then?'
 'Then there is a connection,' she said. The Kundalini shoots
into the sky, and the ancient connection between mind and the
heavens is completed.'
 He turned his head and kissed the inside of her arm. 'And
this is the old theory?'
'A very old theory,' she admitted.
'Then the courtesans have abandoned it?'
  'Most have, of course. Though we still retain the Kundalini
as a symbol of the life energies. The Kundalini, once it's
awakened, enters every nerve in the body, every cell. And then
it wakes up the cells.'
  Quickly, in her serious, dulcet voice, Tamara told him a
little of the courtesans' theory of the Kundalini. She
explained that each cell of the body has its own
consciousness, a cellular consciousness of electron transport
chains and protein synthesis and DNA. When the cells were
completely awakened to the secrets locked inside them,
 511
 segments of DNA that had never been active before – this DNA
was sometimes called the 'sleeping god' – would turn on and
come alive to its true purpose. And then humankind would truly
evolve. It would be a willed evolution, a conscious journey
into a new symmetry of body and mind that few dared dream of.
And then someday, perhaps farwhen, perhaps tomorrow, man and
woman would come together to give birth to the first truly
human being.
 'This is a splendid theory,' Danlo said. 'But is it true?'
 'No one really knows what causes the DNA to turn on, or to
evolve,' she said. 'Some of your eschatologists postulate form
fields or super genes. These theories are almost as old as the
tantra. I've heard that a few masters still teach the random
mutation of the genome as the driving force of evolution, if
you can believe that. The best theory, I think, comes out of
the Rian school. You've heard of Cipriana Ria?'
 'No, who was he?'
  'She,' Tamara said. 'She was the Lord Eschatologist a
hundred years ago. She postulated a consciousness field
isomorphic to the genetic fields the biologists claimed to
have discovered. Of course, this is all still theory. Your
Order has been trying to understand the nature of
consciousness and matter for five thousand years.'
  She went on to discuss the different schools of eschatology,
bringing in theories from other disciplines – such as the
cetics' theory of the circular reduction of consciousness – to
support her arguments. 'Of course, everything that's known
about matter and consciousness will have to be rethought in
light of your father's discovery.'
 'Do you mean the Elder Eddas?'
  She nodded her head. 'It's said that your father discovered
a mathematics of consciousness.'
 'And this mathematics, this consciousness ... is locked up in
memory?'
 'The memory of the cells,' she said. 'If we could wake our
cells up, we could recover these memories.'
512
 'Is this why the courtesans are so interested in Bardo's
remembrances?'
 'Some of us are,' she said. 'And you?'
 She met his eyes and looked at him a long time before saying,
'I want to wake the body up. The self, the whole bodymind. If
this awakening involves the cellular memories, then I've a
passionate interest in remembrancing.'
 'You seem to know a great deal... about a great many things,'
Danlo said. 'You might have been a holist. I did not know the
courtesans were so erudite.'
 Tamara combed her long, blonde hair with her fingers and
beamed in obvious pleasure with his compliment. As he could
see, she loved praise as some people loved chocolate. She was
quite vain, in an open, unselfconscious way. And she was quite
proud, not of her physical beauty, which she took for granted,
but of her accomplishments in the courtesan arts, and most of
all, proud of her memory and mind. Many courtesans learn
smatterings of the various Order disciplines so that they
might converse intelligently with the lords and masters about
important subjects, but few had learned so deeply or well as
Tamara Ten Ashtoreth.
  'I never knew a pilot could have such a talent for ecstasy,'
she said.
He laughed and said, 'Neither did I.'
  'It's rare for the Kundalini to be awakened so easily, with
so little art.'
 'You call what happened tonight... a "little art"?'
 She knelt in front of him, and she seemed both happy and
amused. 'We haven't even touched the first things of the art,'
she said. 'We haven't listened to each other's heartbeat, or
synchronized our breathing, or– '
  'Let's breathe together,' he said. He took her hand, which
was cold from the night air pouring in through the window. His
hands, too, were now cold, as was his face and the whole front
of his body. But his back was still hot;
513
he sat with his back near the fire, and the heat of it still
burned up his spine.
  'It's late,' she said. She had an excellent time sense, much
better than his. 'It must be near midnight.'
 'Then we have three hours till dawn. Let's breathe together
till the first light comes.'
  'I thought you came here to attend the remembrance
ceremony.'
  'No,' he said, 'I came here to meet you. I just did not know
it till now.'
'O beautiful man,' she said, 'there will be other nights.'
'But what of your contracts?'
'Contracts can be broken,' she said.
'Truly?'
 She laughed and then kissed his hands. 'When we join the
Society, we don't surrender our free will.'
  He sat there for a few moments looking at her. At last he
said, 'Shall we go down to the remembrance together, then?'
'I'd like that.'
  'I suppose I should wish Bardo well,' he said. 'And thank
him for the use of this room.'
  They put their clothes on slowly, leisurely, as if time were
a crushing weight that might exist for other people, but not
for them. Then they kissed each other's lips and laughed
together, and they went out to rejoin the party.
514



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

The Way of the Cetic

 People were also waxen mechanical toys, part of a mechantoy
process and were made of candy. People were an utter
absurdity as they went about their rituals, which I contained
completely and knew to be absurd in their circularity,
unconstructiveness and superstitiousness. But they went about
their rituals with a sense of absolute self-righteousness,
hilarious zombies who failed to recognize me as the one who
beneficently supported their existence.
 – from the cetics' archives, source unknown

They returned to the sun room as they had come, walking through
the house and holding hands. The room was now overflowing with
Bardo's guests; the air was even thicker than before, a cloud
of purplish-grey smoke that choked Danlo and irritated his
eyes. It was very noisy. A cruel-looking wormrunner with
jewelled eyes was sadistically banging away on the strings of a
gosharp, and it seemed everyone was trying to talk above
everyone else. Twice people bumped into Danlo and nearly
spilled their goblets of wine. Despite the unpleasantness of
the room, the people's mood was one of camaraderie and
celebration. Danlo pulled at Tamara's hand as he stepped over
the legs of a woman collapsed into stupor, who obviously had
been celebrating with too much devotion. He turned his head
right and left, looking among the sea of faces for Bardo.
  'Danlo!' a voice boomed out. Tamara Ten Ashtoreth, come over
here!'
 515
   In the centre of the room, surrounded by eight or nine
women, stood Bardo with a plate of pepper nuts in his hand and
tears running from his huge brown eyes. Since giving up beer,
he had become addicted to eating hot foods which burned his
mouth and made his eyes glisten with water. He was even huger
than Danlo had remembered, and he seemed vaster, inside,
bubbling with energy as if his belly, throat and lips were a
fleshy tube channelling the plasma of the stars. His rolling,
basso voice riveted the attention of those around him. And when
he spoke, he moved his hands and fingers in a lovely dance of
signs which reinforced his words. Danlo glanced at Bardo's fat
hands, at his bearded face and gaudy robe. The huge man wore a
jewelled ring on each of his fingers, and his rainbow robe was
studded with emeralds, rubies, and opals. Around his neck,
openly, he wore a brilliant Yarkonan firestone. Such
ostentation might have diminished a lesser human being, but
Bardo's truest self was as opulent as any jewel, and so his
outer style served only to magnify this inner self, to deepen
his pride and make him seem even larger.
  Bardo set his plate atop a table laden with lacquer-ware,
and he threw his arms around Danlo. 'Little Fellow!' he called
out as he thumped Danlo's back. 'Little Fellow, by God, you're
not so little any more!'
 Indeed, he and Danlo were almost of the same height, though
Bardo carried enough muscle and fat to make two men. Danlo
looked at him eye to eye, and then he was smiling, embracing
Bardo without restraint as the Alaloi men do, as if they were
brothers of the same tribe.
'You look well,' Danlo said at last.
  'Ah, but I am well. I've never been so well – sometimes I
think it's impossible to be more well, but I try, as you'll
see.'
 He turned to Tamara and bowed as deeply as his belly would
allow. 'I'm honoured that the most beautiful of the courtesans
could attend another joyance,' he said. He grinned at her with
an easy and obvious gladness, and
516
with a hint of lust as well. 'I've, ah, heard that you've
already made Danlo's acquaintance.'
  Just then, there was a flash of orange behind Bardo, and
Hanuman stepped into view. He sipped from a tumbler of water as
he looked back and forth between Danlo and Tamara. He seemed
relaxed and nonchalant, but he kept looking at them as if he
were drinking in information that only a cetic could make use
of.
  'Hanuman li Tosh!' Bardo said. 'I didn't see you standing
there – why didn't you announce yourself sooner?'
  Hanuman bowed to him and smiled. 'Hello, Bardo,' was all he
said.
  'As silent as a cetic, I see. Ah, but you've done well for
yourself, too. I'd hoped you'd become a pilot, but the cetic's
robe suits you, Young Hanuman. Did you know there's talk among
your masters that you're destined to be Lord Cetic someday?'
  Hanuman flashed Bardo a quick, piercing look that spoke of
an old tension and an instant understanding between the two of
them. Danlo watched the way Hanuman bowed his head very
slightly, the way his eyes hooded over and his breath
quickened. He saw the faintest lineaments of the subtle and
sinister relationship existing between Hanuman and Bardo. But
he could not, then and there, descry any deeper pattern to this
relationship; he could only listen as Hanuman enunciated each
of his words with great precision and clarity: 'But I'm not
even a full cetic yet, much less a master. Of all the
professions, we take the longest to train masters. You should
know, there's never been a journeyman who has proceeded up the
grades to master cetic in less than fifteen years.'
  'Well, fifteen years is a long time,' Bardo said. He swept
his arm out and nodded to the many people standing about.
'Especially during these times. Fifteen years ago, Mallory
Ringess was still a man, and I was just a drunken fool.'
517
 As he spoke, a tiny woman with red eyes and purple-black skin
the same colour as Bardo's edged her way to his side and said,
'You were never a fool. Would Mallory Ringess have chosen you
as a friend if you were a fool?'
 'Ah,' Bardo said, 'may I present my cousin, the Princess
Surya Surata Lal of Summerworld? These are my friends. Firstly,
Tamara Ten Ashtoreth, Voluptuary in the Society of Courtesans.'
  Surya bowed to Tamara, quickly and coldly, as if she
disapproved of her title and way of life. Tamara returned her
bow and smiled nicely, and her natural grace and graciousness
seemed only to irritate Surya and cause her to turn away.
  'And may I present Hanuman li Tosh and Danlo wi Soli Ringess
– they've been inseparable since their novitiate.'
   Upon the pronouncement of his name, all the people in the
immediate area of the room looked at Danlo. A horologe in her
bright red robe, a merchant-prince sipping from a tumbler of
skotch, a dreamy-eyed autist, a harijan boy carrying plates of
sizzling food from the kitchen – they all paused to examine
Danlo, to bow politely and stand attentively as if they were
waiting for him to say something of moment. But Danlo could
think of nothing to say. He was too aware of the smells of
curry and capsicum burning in his nostrils, too aware of his
own acrid sweat. Tamara pressed close to him, and the
marvellous, thick smell of sex was like a drug waking up all
his senses. He heard someone across the room whisper: 'He's
the son of Mallory Ringess!' From other parts of the house
came waves of distracting sounds: the melodies of the
improvisatori plucking at gosharps and making up verses, the
irritating hum of mantra musicians, and three hundred voices
buzzing and braying and hissing at him. He was suddenly aware
that everyone was aware of him. Or rather, they were aware of
him only as the son of his father. And thus they truly could
not see him, as man or human being, and this lack of
mindfulness and vision on their behalf shamed him.
518
It was a shame he would feel burning up his throat every time
he entered Bardo's house.
  Surya bowed to Danlo and said, 'I'm honoured to make your
acquaintance. My cousin tells me you hope to leave Neverness
soon. You're to be a pilot, like the Ringess, and you hope to
be chosen to make the journey to the Vild, do I remember
correctly?'
  'Yes, that's true,' Danlo said. He glanced at Tamara, whose
face fell sad with disappointment. This sudden look wounded
him. He had meant to tell her of his plan to join the Vild
mission, but in the excitement of their evening together, he
had forgotten.
 'It's a pity that the Order is training pilots for this
mission,' Surya said. The Order can't really stop the stars
from exploding, do you think? No, of course not. It would be
better if the Order trained remembrancers instead of pilots.'
 She had a sharp, presumptuous way of speaking that amused and
annoyed Danlo. As she looked him over, she rubbed at her eyes,
which were bloodshot from smoking the potent bhang they grow on
Summerworld. She was addicted to bhang, although she would
never admit it, citing instead allergies to Icefall's strange
flora as the cause of her red eyes. Danlo thought that she was
an ambitious woman who would too easily lie, and he immediately
mistrusted her.
 'There must be a way ... to keep the blessed stars from
dying,' Danlo said softly. 'If the stars die, we shall die,
too. The animals, the birds, even the iceblooms and snowworms –
everything will die.'
'Oh, Young Danlo, you should have more faith in life,' Surya
said.
  'Life,' Danlo said, 'it is blessed, truly ... but fragile.
Nothing is so blessed and fragile.'
  With a tiny, claw-like hand, Surya caressed the sleeve of
her blue kimono, and said, 'But what of the Golden Ring? Your
father created it to shield your planet from the
519
Vild's radiation. All life, didn't you know? Soon all the
Civilized Worlds will see such rings growing around them.
Mallory Ringess, himself, spoke of these things before he left
Neverness. Isn't that so, Bardo?'
 Bardo patted his rumbling belly and touched the shoulder of a
rather fat woman standing off behind him. She looked at him
with dark, fawning eyes, as if she were only waiting to fetch a
tumbler of toalache or another plate of food. 'Ah,' Bardo said,
'the Ringess never stated this explicitly. But that was the
intention of what he told me on the beach, before he left,
certainly.'
  Danlo gazed out of the window, thinking of the galaxy's vast
light-distances, the cold and almost endless spaces filled with
photons, neutrinos, and gamma rays. Nearly twenty years before,
when he was still a baby in his milk-stained furs, a star in
the Abelian Group had exploded into a supernova. With each
breath that he had taken since then, this star's killing
radiation had expanded outward through deep space half a
million miles. Even as he listened to a hundred murmuring
voices and watched Surya Surata Lal's face fall cold with
smugness and sanctimony, the supernova's wavefront was only
forty thousand billion miles from Neverness, and soon, in only
eight more years, it would fall over the City of Pain in a
lightshower of death. Or of life. Perhaps, he thought, the
Golden Ring would absorb this deadly light, shielding Neverness
and continuing to grow across the heavens.
  'Who knows what the Golden Ring truly is?' Danlo
half-whispered. 'What it will be?'
 'Don't you believe what your own father said?' Surya asked
him.
  Here Hanuman, who was standing across from Danlo, let out a
rare burst of laughter. And then, in his clear cetic's voice –
an intensely ironic voice – he said, 'Well, you should know
that Danlo doesn't like to believe anything. You might say he's
the world's greatest believer in unbelief.'
520
 Everyone laughed at this little joke, even Tamara, who eyed
Hanuman as if he were a beautiful but venomous snake that one
had to handle with great care.
  Bardo reached out a massive hand and rumpled Danlo's hair.
His voice rolled out, 'Beliefs are the eyelids of the mind,
isn't that so?'
 'The mind has many eyelids,' Danlo said. After Bardo was done
mauling his head, Danlo touched Ahira's white feather to make
sure that it was still fastened to his hair. And then he looked
at Hanuman in reproof as if to say: 'What is wrong with you
tonight?'
  After a brief silence, Surya asked him, 'Were you a student
of the Fravashi? Bardo invited a Fravashi Old Father to our
joyance but he refused to come.'
  'In fact,' Bardo said as he rubbed his belly, 'I invited
your Old Father, the one who taught you when you came to
Neverness. By God, I wish these Fravashi had real names! Ah, I
wanted to demonstrate to an Honoured Fravashi the power of our
remembrancing techniques, but he turned me down, too bad.'
'Why?' Danlo asked.
 'He gave me the silliest of excuses. He said that he couldn't
enter my house, that the Fravashi have a superstition against
entering buildings taller than one storey.'
Danlo laughed and said, 'But this is true!'
'Really?'
 'They believe that dwelling in large buildings will cause
them to sicken and die,' Danlo said.
 'Doesn't it ever disturb you,' Surya asked Danlo, 'that a
race of superstitious old aliens still have a power in your
City? In your Order?'
  Bardo suddenly rolled his eyes and let loose a sigh. 'You
see, Danlo, my cousin believes that alien thoughtways are, ah,
inappropriate for humans.'
 'The Fravashi,' Surya said, 'Supposedly teach methods for
freeing the individual from all systems of belief. All systems
of thought, even their own – I understand this
521
goal. What could be more seductive than total freedom?'
  'Ah,' Bardo said to Danlo, 'have I told you that my cousin
is a great champion of freedom? No? Did you know that she freed
the slaves on Summerworld? Of course that was before the
rebellion. Before our family fell and was banished. But Surya
Surata Lal is still remembered, I'm sure.'
   In truth, Surya Lal had been a princess of Summerworld, and
she had spent her maturity fighting for the freedom of enslaved
peoples and robots, just as she had spent part of her youth
campaigning for the rights of dolls, those strange information
ecologies that exist in computer space and are said to be
alive. She was a woman who loved freedom and embraced the great
movements of her time, a formidable woman now devoted to her
cousin and the movement that soon would be called The Way of
Ringess'.
  Danlo ran his fingers through his hair. 'All peoples think
they love freedom,' he said.
 'Of course,' Surya said. 'But real freedom, for a human
being, lies in discovering human possibilities.'
 'Human possibilities,' Danlo repeated softly. He closed his
eyes, vividly remembering Tamara's very human face during the
moment she had cried out in her ecstasy. It had been a moment
of complete freedom, and yet, paradoxically, of complete
surrender to the forces of life. 'Who knows what is possible?'
he asked.
 He hadn't really expected an answer to this rhetorical
question, so he was amused when Surya said, 'Your father gave
his life to bring back the secret of human possibilities. The
ways we might transcend our limitations. Our stupidity, our
baseness, even our human bodies. Especially our bodies and
brains – you're smiling at me, Danlo wi Soli Ringess, but
that's because you're still young and beautiful. I don't think
you can imagine what it's like to grow so old that you can't be
brought back to youth any more. Old in the brain. Old and
rotten and ugly.'
  As they spoke, a circle of people crowded around them,
pressing them closer together. He felt Tamara moving up
522
against him, intertwining her fingers in his. Surya was pushed
over against Bardo's great belly, and Danlo was so close to her
that he smelled sihu oil and the sweet smokiness of bhang
clinging to her silk kimono. Directly across from him stood
Hanuman, watching and listening. Danlo read cynicism on his
pale face. He saw Hanuman lift a finger to point at Surya; no
one else saw this subtle, almost imperceptible movement, just
as no one else understood his hand language as he signed to
Danlo: This is an ugly woman. It's as I've always said: beauty
is only skin deep but penetrates to the bone.
  Danlo shook his head as if to reproach Hanuman for being so
cruel. He turned to Surya and took note of the lines about her
tiny red eyes, at the corners of her worm-hole of a mouth. He
didn't need the cetics' art to read the fear there. Although
she was only middling old and might last another three hundred
years before her final old age, it was obvious that decrepitude
and death terrified her. Not even wailing, jittery Old Irisha,
during the days his tribe had gone over, had been so
dehumanized by fear. There is something about civilized people
that I have always wondered at,' Danlo said. The longer they
live, the more they are afraid of dying.'
  'Ah, but dying isn't so hard,' Bardo said as he rubbed his
chest. Once, when he was a young man, he had taken an Alaloi
spear through the chest and had died his first death. He had
been frozen and thawed and healed, only to face death once
again when his lightship had disappeared into the fiery heart
of star. A goddess called Kalinda had resurrected him, or so he
liked to tell everyone, and ever since he had waxed
philosophical about all such vital matters. 'What's death but a
brief moment of peace before the pieces of ourselves are
reassembled and we're condemned to live again?' Bardo said.
'It's living that vexes the soul. Living fully and well.'
 At this, Surya tightened her lips as if she had too often
endured Bardo's musings. Then she scowled at Danlo and
523
 said, 'Everyone is afraid of dying. Human beings are in
bondage to the fear of death.'
 'That's very true,' Hanuman said. 'You're a perceptive
woman.'
   Surya, quite obviously, didn't perceive any irony in this
simple utterance, for she favoured Hanuman with a smile and her
face brightened. 'I've heard that the cetics claim all emotions
flow from fear.'
 'That's almost true,' Hanuman said. The propagation of life
is the fundamental algorithm of life. Is the urge to propagate
really the same as the fear of death? Let's suppose it is. All
emotions, then, if treated as caused responses programmed into
an organism, are in some way designed to preserve life so that
it may propagate itself.'
   'I've heard that cetics can read the emotions off people's
faces.'
 'It's one of our arts,' Hanuman said. 'One of the most
ancient.'
   In fact, as Hanuman had once told Danlo, the cetics trace
the genesis of face reading at least as far back as the work
of the ancient portrait artists, Titian, Dürer and the
Leonardo, whose ideal was that the portrait of a person should
be the mirror of the soul.
   'I've also heard that cetics can read thoughts,' Surya said,
'but I've never really believed it.'
 'Sometimes we can do something like reading thoughts.'
   'But thoughts aren't programmed into us like emotions,' she
said. 'Aren't they?'
 Here Bardo rubbed his hands together, and to Surya he said,
'Did you know that Mallory Ringess learned something of the
cetics' powers? He could look at you and tell you what you
were thinking, by God. He could lay your soul bare, and that's
why people were afraid of him. And more, he could look at a
stranger and tell what he was about to do and say before he
said and did it.'
 'Can you tell these things?' Surya asked Hanuman.
524
  Hanuman bowed his head and looked at her. 'Sometimes I can
read the tells,' he said. 'But this is a trivial use of the
art. It's really rather silly, don't you think?'
  'Could you do it now?' she asked. She was obviously enchanted
with this notion of face reading, and enchanted with Hanuman
as well. She suddenly held up a small, bony finger and pointed
across the room. There, do you see the tall man in the brown
robe?'
'The historian? The one who's bald?'
 'I suppose he's an historian,' Surya said. 'I really haven't
had the opportunity to learn which academicians wear which
colours. Can you tell me what he's thinking?'
 Hanuman stood very straight as he looked across the room. His
intensity of concentration caused Surya and the others to look
at him, instead of the historian. Despite Hanuman's words
making little of the face reading art, he secretly relished
exhibiting his talents.
 'He's thinking of danger,' he said. 'He's thinking that
Bardo's house is full of dangerous people, and now, it's in his
eyes, the extension of slight danger to life-threatening peril
– people always do this – he's thinking of fleeing the City.
And now, the guilt at his own cowardice. He would like to
believe that the Golden Ring will shield the City from the
Vild's radiation. But he's a cynical man, and half a coward,
even though he would describe himself as a prudent man, a "Man
for all time" or some other such conceit. He's an historian –
he pays attention to the emigration figures. But he's also
aware that twice as many people are swarming into Neverness as
are leaving her, and he can't quite understand it. He's really
a bit befuddled. Which is why he's attending this joyance. He
has questions of universal moment, or so he thinks. He's
looking for answers. The greater the doubt, the greater the
need for faith. Faith – what is this emotion but a desperate
attempt to escape from mind-burning fear?'
 Surya nodded her head, obviously amazed by Hanuman's
performance. And then Danlo, who was also looking
525
 toward the historian with a certain concentration of senses,
broke into laughter. It began as a slight flutter in his belly
and then spread out so quickly that he was shaking and
laughing like a young man giddy from his first taste of magic
mushrooms.
'By God, is there a joke here?' Bardo wanted to know.
  'No, not... a joke,' Danlo said, after he had caught his
breath.
'What then?'
  Danlo closed his eyes for a moment, listening. His sense of
hearing had been quickened by a lifetime of identifying the
smallest sounds of the world. Tonight, this sense was
extraordinarily keen. He could hear, very faintly, the
historian talking about the Way of Ringess and other
religions. Even though they stood across the room from each
other, he could pick out the historian's high voice and
frightened words from the words of all those around him. He
opened his eyes, then, and he said to Hanuman, 'I think the
historian has just been discussing the very things you have
revealed to us.'
'Are you saying he's been cheating?' Bardo asked.
  'I have heard that the cetics can read lips,' Danlo said,
and he smiled at Hanuman. This is part of your art, yes?'
  'Of course it is. The lips are part of the face, are they
not? What better way to read a face?'
 'Then you have been cheating?' Surya asked. 'I didn't think
it was possible to read someone's thoughts.'
 Again, Hanuman bowed to her, and he then looked her up and
down, and his eyes were shiny and hard. He said, 'It's
impossible to cheat if there aren't any rules to cheat against.
However. Do you see the woman slumped over against the far
wall?'
 Surya turned to look at a woman standing alone in front of
one of Bardo's wall paintings. Danlo and the others looked at
her, too. She was dressed in a distinctive cowl jacket,
complete with the baggy hood and braided strings, the kind the
aphasics wear.
526
 'She's an aphasic,' Hanuman said. 'Do you know about the
aphasics, Princess Lal? The sect is probably unique to
Neverness. They have voices, but no language. They can hear
words but they can't understand them. They disfigure the brains
of their children to destroy the language centres. Don't look
so shocked – they're not the monsters most people think. They
do what they do because they think words interfere with the
direct apprehension of reality. And distort reality. Which is
why I've chosen her. She can't have spoken to anyone because
she can't speak. She's come here tonight in the hope that you
illuminati, those who have been touched by Mallory Ringess,
will have found a way of communicating directly, heart to
heart, without words. But she's disappointed. She's lonely.
She's bored. She's been unable to connect with anyone here.
She's thinking – people can think, you should know, even when
the words have been stolen from their minds – she's thinking of
leaving the party.'
 'I'm not convinced,' Surya said. 'If I had known about these
poor aphasics, just looking at her, I might have guessed
everything you've said.'
 Hanuman flashed Surya a dangerous look, then continued, 'When
I move my finger like this, the aphasic will leave the room.'
He waited a moment and then raised his finger slightly. As if a
signal had been given, as if an invisible string connected the
aphasic with Hanuman's gloved finger, she jerked herself erect
and turned her back on Bardo's guests. With a heavy, shuffling
gait, she walked out of the room.
  'By God, how did you know? How did you do that?' Bardo
asked.
  'I'm beginning to be convinced,' Surya said. 'But are you
certain you're not still cheating? This aphasic isn't an
acquaintance of yours, is she?'
  In answer, Hanuman smiled his secretive smile. Then he
singled out various men and women across the room. 'Do you see
the old phantast with the huge Adam's apple?
527
 When I signal, he will cough.' And Hanuman lifted his finger,
and the phantast did indeed cough, and so it went, around the
room, Hanuman pointing at people and descrying the moment they
would cough, rub their eyes, laugh, dance, frown, speak, or
drink from their goblets of wine. He would lift his finger, and
people would move in the appointed ways, as if he were a doll
master pulling at their heartstrings. It was an eerie, almost
sinister demonstration of the cetic's art. It convinced Surya
that Hanuman was a man of rare power, but she wasn't quite
ready to admit that he could have any power over her.
 'These people,' she said, 'they don't suspect you're watching
them. It's hard to believe you could read the face of someone
who has composed herself.'
'Such as yourself, Princess?'
 'What am I thinking, right now?' she asked. Her face
tightened up like a piece of dried bloodfruit. She was almost
squinting with the effort of keeping her face empty. 'Can you
tell me?'
  'No, Hanu, don't,' Danlo said softly. He looked at Hanuman
and shook his head. He hated this game of Hanuman's; he hated
everything about treating human beings as robots whose very
lives were programmed into them. Most of all he hated what he
saw in Hanuman, the pride and the sudden fury flashing in his
eyes.
 'Should I be silent merely because my best friend so implores
me?' Hanuman asked. He stepped forward so that Danlo, Tamara,
Bardo and Surya surrounded him. Clearly, he relished being at
the centre of things, just as he exulted in the practice of his
powers. He looked at Surya and said, 'Or should I be silent
because my ethics discourage reading someone's thoughts to her
face? Should I be silent at all? Isn't there a time for
rashness and truth? I believe that Danlo would admit there is.
Tamara, too. Let me be rash, then. Let me be truthful. No,
Danlo, please don't look at me that way – this is a rare chance
for you to find out what others are thinking of you. To see
yourself just as
528
others do. Oh, I know you've no care for yourself. Which is why
everyone loves you. And is afraid of you. It's your wildness,
your childlike qualities: you're too absorbed in the things of
the world to worry about yourself. But others worry. The
Princess Lal – she worries. She'd like to believe in this silly
art of reading faces because she'd like to read you. She's been
thinking about you ever since Bardo announced your name. You
disturb her. Your very name offends her.'
  He turned from Danlo to Surya with an intensity of motion,
whirling about as if he were executing a movement from his
killing art. His face was as hard and sharp as a knife, and he
said to her, 'Everyone calls him "Danlo the Wild". You're
wondering, Princess, if he's really as wild as his name. I
assure you that he is. He's even wilder than you'd want to
imagine. Where will all this wildness lead, you ask yourself.
Is he truly the son of his father? Danlo wi Soli Ringess – I've
said that his name offends you, but not which name. I'll say it
now: Danlo is a Ringess, if not the Ringess. Does the universe
need another? Or is one Ringess one too many? You doubt. You're
full of doubts. Do you know about instantaneity? Stopping time?
Stop! In this instant, stop your thoughts and fix them, as if
they were ants in amber. That's the way. Your face, if only you
could see it now, now that you truly believe. You're thinking
of Mallory Ringess and all the things he wrought. The Golden
Ring. You wonder how this specific thought, this golden image
could be written across your face. And another thought, which
you dread more than death: am I making you think these things?
Am I? Are thoughts programmed into us, or are we masters of our
will? Please, don't turn your eyes away! If you do, you'll only
wonder if that's what I wanted you to do. You wonder about
human freedom. You're agonizing over this right now. What is
possible for human beings? Mallory Ringess gave his life to
discover his own possibilities. Who is so fearless? Is Danlo,
whom we all love like we love the sunlight, made of the
529
same substance as the father? You pray that he is not; you
fear that he is. Fear is the quintessence of the soul. It
shapes all that we do. If Danlo is truly fearless and wild,
then what might he do? More precisely, what might he not do?
Where will his wildness lead? You wonder this. Your thoughts
are turning in circles. Turning and turning. Let me break the
circle, then, and leave you with a new thought: which of us
can match this wildness of Danlo's? And why should we want
to?'
  Hanuman ceased speaking and stood very still. He stared at
Surya. It seemed that he was only waiting to lash out with his
tongue again.
 'Here, now, that's enough,' Bardo said. He moved over by
Hanuman's side and laid his arm across his shoulders. He stood
over him like a mountain, and his voice boomed out: '"Debate a
cetic, hate a cetic".'
  But Surya did not hate Hanuman, for all that he had said to
her. She was enchanted with him. She, whose soul he had laid
bare with his sensitive eyes and cutting tongue, looked at him
as if he were a god, or rather, a superhuman man in personal
contact with the realm of the godly. Her face fell from
astonishment to adulation to embarrassment at having her
thoughts uncovered. In an effort to hide her embarrassment, she
turned to Danlo and began to lie.
  'I wasn't really thinking about you at all,' Surya said. Her
face was now an ugly reddish-black mask of misdirection and
untruth. 'I don't know why your friend would say such things.
The whole time, I was thinking about the recipe for curried
chicken that my mother taught me. I've always loved curry
dishes – I suppose this was cheating, to hold my thoughts this
way.'
  Danlo rubbed the scar above his eye, looked at Tamara, and
then smiled. Although it took a great deal to embarrass him,
Hanuman's strange soliloquy might have succeeded in doing just
that if he hadn't been in love and overflowing with a
marvellous sense of aliveness. He was embarrassed
530
 for Surya, however, even if he wished that she had remained on
Summerworld with her curry dishes and her slaves. He bowed to
her and said, 'As Hanuman has reminded us, there is no cheating
in a game ... that has no rules.'
  Hanuman gazed at him, then, with his compelling cetic's
eyes. But Danlo was the one person that he could never stare
down, and he finally broke eyelock and looked away.
  Surya rubbed her neck and sighed. She seemed mollified by
Danlo's last statement. 'I must tell you,' she said, 'I've
nothing against your name. You can't help the accident of your
birth.'
'We each have our own fate,' Danlo said.
 'And we each have free will. Your father taught that
ultimately, fate and free will are the same thing.'
 'You seem to be a woman of... unusual will,' he said.
  Surya's face came aglow and she smiled at him for the first
time. Despite her thin lips and coffee-stained teeth, she had a
beautiful smile. He saw that this difficult woman, but for her
dishonesty and fear, might have attained a shibui beauty so
rare among the people of the City.
  'You're not afraid,' she said, 'of being kind to a difficult
woman who hasn't been very kind to you. Perhaps you really are
fearless.'
'No one is fearless,' he said.
 'Hanuman was right about that, at least,' she said. 'We're
all afflicted with fear – it's the human condition. But
there's a way out, didn't you know?'
'If you mean my father– '
  'When the Ringess was still a man,' she said in a rush of
breath, interrupting him, 'he suffered from the great fear,
just as everybody does. But he found a way out of suffering, a
way to free himself.'
  Bardo, who was obviously glad that the conversation had
turned back upon matters more closely allied with his
531
 purpose, suddenly smacked his fist into his open hand. His
rings clicked together, and his voice rang out, 'By God,
that's the way of Ringess, to face the universe as a god and
never look back in fear!'
  'It's the way of Ringess,' Surya said, 'to find freedom from
suffering.'
  'Yes, the Ringess pointed the way toward real freedom,'
Bardo said. His great voice dominated the room, and everyone
looked at him. It was suddenly very quiet. He seemed delighted,
and relieved, to be once again at the centre of an attentive
audience. 'And the only real freedom is the freedom of a god.'
  There was a moment of silence and then someone called out,
'And anyone can become a god.'
'Or God,' another person said.
'Give me a couple of sips of kalla and I'll see God.'
'Give me three sips of kalla and I'll be God.'
  'But it's never that easy,' a plump woman standing near
Bardo said. She wore the blue robe of an eschatologist, and her
name was Kolenya Mor, Lord Mor, the Order's Lord Eschatologist.
'At least, the remembrances are never so easy for me. Why does
it have to be so hard?'
  Bardo nodded his head and he rubbed his hands together
vigorously. He looked about the room to fix the eyes of his
various guests, and in his huge voice he laughed out, 'It is
hard, that's true, and this brings us again to our work. Or, I
should say, to our joy. By God, everyone knows Bardo is the
laziest man in the City, so if I can drink kalla and
remembrance the Eddas, anyone can. Ah, it's past time. I invite
any of you who haven't had a remembrance for ten days to come
with us into the music room. Tonight we have a young cetic with
us, and his friend, Danlo wi Soli Ringess. The son of the
Ringess, who may become a god someday, too.'
  Again, many people in the circle around Bardo bowed to
Danlo, and he felt a heat wave of shame burning his eyes. He
noticed Hanuman smiling at him both in mockery
532
and compassion, and perhaps with an intimation of challenge,
too.
  As Bardo and the others began moving toward the door of the
room, Tamara pulled at Danlo's hand and took him aside. Even
though courtesans love to talk, she had mostly kept her silence
during Danlo's discussion with Surya and Hanuman. But now she
said, 'I think you should be careful of Hanuman li Tosh.'
  'I am always careful of him,' Danlo said. 'Friends should
always take ... careful awareness of each other, yes?'
'Please be careful in the remembrance.'
'Is remembrancing so dangerous?'
  'Oh, it's dangerous enough,' Tamara said. The kalla drug
itself is dangerous, but I think the greatest danger is
attempting a remembrance when your soul is on fire. Don't let
Hanuman poison you with his doubts. Or his despair.'
 'Tonight,' he said, 'I am as far from despair as I have ever
been.'
  'I can't go into the remembrance with you,' she said. 'It's
only been five days since my last one.'
'And you are not ready for another?'
  'I'm not sure,' she said. 'But even if I were, Bardo
believes the kalla should be taken as a sacrament. One doesn't
partake of sacraments every day.'
'No, but perhaps they should,' Danlo said.
'I'm sorry.'
  Danlo drew her hands up to his lips and kissed them. It was
a shocking thing for him to do, in open sight of others. Then
we should say goodnight, now,' he said.
'If you like, we could meet again in a few days.'
'Why such a long time?'
'After your remembrance, you'll want to be alone.'
'I can't imagine wanting to be alone.'
'Danlo, please be....'
'Yes?'
  As people streamed by them, almost brushing their garments
and trying not to notice their adoration of each
 533
 other, Danlo touched her forehead, looking for her thoughts in
the darkness of her eyes.
'Please be careful of yourself,' she said.
  She kissed his lips then, and said goodbye to him. He left
the room stepping so lightly he could scarcely feel his feet,
and all the time he never stopped wondering about what she had
said.
534



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Kalla

 Drink! for you know not whence you came, nor why; Drink!
for you know not why you go, nor where.
                      – from The Rubáiyát by Omar Khayyam

 Danlo followed a group of Bardo's admirers out of the sun
room's north door. A river of silk and flesh swept him down a
brilliantly lit hallway. He was aware, dimly, that most of the
guests were being left behind. He heard many grumbles and moans
and little arguments, tens of voices protesting Bardo's
restrictiveness. Most thought that they should be allowed a
remembrance at least as frequently as every three days; a few
reckless characters – such as Jonathan Hur – called for a daily
remembrance, or even a moment-to-moment, continual
remembrancing of the Elder Eddas. But Bardo was clearly in
control of events and master of his house, and so he allowed
only a tenth of his guests to follow him into north wing.
Including Hanuman, who walked by Bardo's side, there were
thirty-eight of them, and their excited, buzzing voices made
for a good deal of noise. Danlo found it strange the way this
noise seemed to melt into the glittering walls and vanish
abruptly. Everything about this hallway of organic stone was
strange: the odd angles or absence of any angles at all, the
luminescence of billions of tiny light cells embedded within
the walls, the sudden silences that enclosed them and followed
them as they moved deeper into the house. Danlo had an uneasy
feeling that he was moving downward, though he could plainly
see from the pitch of the
535
floor that he was not. After he had walked on a way, past
guest rooms filled with rare furniture and flowers, Bardo
dropped back through his procession of followers and threw his
arm around Danlo's shoulders. 'In a way,' he said, 'it's too
bad this house was ever sold.'
  As they strolled together he talked of little things,
avoiding any mention of Hanuman's performance. He told Danlo
something of the house's history. He explained that the Order
had owned the house for two thousand years, but after the War
of the Faces, with the Order in decline and nearly ruined, the
College of Lords had found themselves suddenly impoverished.
Consequently, various properties across the City had been sold
off, including Bardo's house. It had since been owned by
exemplars, by harijan trying to establish an unofficial embassy
on Neverness, again by exemplars, and then by a wealthy family
of astriers who had lived there for almost four hundred years
while awaiting a fresh planet to colonize. Most recently a
merchant-prince had owned the house, though he never occupied
it and was very glad to sell it to Bardo.
 'It's too bad for the Order,' Bardo said. 'But their loss is
my gain, or, I should say, the good luck of those wishing to
explore the possibilities your father discovered. Heretofore,
the Order has made it difficult for true seekers, such as
myself, too bad.'
 'Perhaps the Order will come to support your work,' Danlo
said.
  'No, Little Fellow, that's unlikely, now.' Bardo tilted his
head closer to Danlo's, and he dropped his voice low and deep.
Danlo noticed immediately that the familiar aroma of beer was
gone from his breath. 'Shall I tell you a thing about the
remembrancers? It's a sad truth, but only a few of them have
been able to fully remembrance the Eddas. And they have all but
left the Order to live with me and train memory guides.'
  'But what about the other remembrancers?' Danlo asked.
536
 'They took a vote and a third of them decided that the Elder
Eddas do not really exist, that your father was a liar. That he
wanted to excite people to a belief in the ineffable. He did
this only to revitalize our Order, they say. Ah, your Order,
now, that is. Another third regard the Eddas as false memories,
or myths, or universal archetypes, confabulations of eternal
truths created by our goddamned brains.'
'And the other third?'
 'They're undecided,' Bardo said. The Order, as a whole, is
undecided about the secrets your father brought back to them.
Barbarians, all of them. Ah well, most of them. The truth is,
they're more concerned with this mission to the Vild. Obsessed
with it. Everyone who's got any talent or vision is campaigning
to be included in the second Order, when it splits off, as it
inevitably will.'
  Bardo paused to squeeze Danlo's shoulder and shoot him a
pointed look. They were standing in the middle of the hallway
outside the music room. As the others ducked through the music
room's circular doorway one by one and took their places
inside, Bardo said, 'I understand why you'll have to go to the
Vild, Little Fellow. When I was younger, I would have gone,
too. These are apocalyptic times, by God, but there's a lot to
worry about other than exploding stars.'
'You must know what I worry about,' Danlo said.
 'The Alaloi? It's been five years – you haven't forgotten
about their, ah, predicament?'
'Forgotten!'
  'Ah, no, I can see you remember very well. Perhaps too well.
Well – I hope you find a cure for the plague virus, if you
journey to the Vild.'
  Danlo touched the lightning scar on his forehead, and he
pressed his finger down until there was a pressure against the
bone. He said, 'And I hope you find the Eddas.'
 'Well,' Bardo said, 'Kolenya Mor was right, for most people
the Elder Eddas are hard to remember, too bad.'
'Have you remembered them?'
537
  'Ah, but you've always asked the hard questions, haven't
you, Little Fellow?'
Danlo bowed his head and smiled. 'Do I?' he asked.
  'In truth, I've remembered something,' Bardo said. He tapped
at his massive head and then looked through the doorway of the
music room. 'Something marvellous. Why else would I have gone
to all the trouble and expense of buying this goddamned house
if I hadn't remembranced something we might as well call the
Elder Eddas?'
'Some might say ... can I be truthful, Bardo?'
  'Must you? Ah, of course you must – it's the curse of your
family.'
 'Some might say that you had a taste for power. Or glory. Or
even ... women.'
  'Women? Well, it's true, women are always attracted to men
such as I. Like moths to a flame. So, I enjoy beautiful women,
who wouldn't? But I've a taste for other things, too. A taste
for the miraculous, to put it plainly. Life is complicated,
isn't it? Hideously complicated, as your father used to say.'
'And you are a complicated man,' Danlo said.
'A deep man,' Bardo agreed, 'a passionate man.'
'And men of passion ... must do passionate things, yes?'
'How well you understand!'
  Danlo smiled at Bardo and inclined his head. As if a signal
had been given, they both began to laugh. Again, Bardo embraced
him and smacked his hand against Danlo's back and said, 'By
God, it's good to see you again!'
'I am glad you've come back,' Danlo said.
  Bardo continued laughing without restraint, and he held his
knuckles up to his watery eyes. By chance, a teardrop touched
one of his rings, a platinum band implanted with a pink and
blue opal. With the tip of his finger, he smeared the salt
water around the opal's sparkling surface, and said, 'I've
always had a fondness for jewels, though I confess I always
disliked the pilots' rings. Black is such a dreary colour, no
colour at all to make diamond. Ah, I've wanted
538
 to ask you about the ring – do you still have your father's
ring?'
  From the neck of his kamelaika, Danlo withdrew the silver
chain that Bardo had given him five years earlier. Fastened to
the end of the chain was a black diamond ring.
  'Ah,' Bardo said, 'aha, there it is.' So saying, he plunged
his hand into a pocket in his robe and removed one of his steel
invitation cards. 'Do you see it, Danlo?'
  Danlo looked at the card in Bardo's hand. A hologram of two
interlocked rings, gold and black, jumped out from the steel
and seemed to spin as Danlo examined it. The hologram of the
black ring, obviously, was an imago of his diamond pilot's
ring.
'People need their symbols, you see,' Bardo said.
  Danlo read a strain of longing and sadness in Bardo's weepy
eyes, and he said, 'Shall I return the ring to you? If you
would rather keep it ... it is just a simple pilot's ring,
yes?'
  For a moment Bardo hesitated as he stared at the ring that
Danlo held between his fingers. Then he sighed and said, 'No,
no, you keep the ring. But keep it safely – I wouldn't like to
see it lost.'
  Danlo tucked the ring back down his kamelaika. He peered
into the music room and saw that everyone had taken their
seats. He said, They are waiting for us.'
  Again, Bardo laughed, and said, 'And that's not all that's
waiting there.'
'What do you mean?'
  'I mean, the Elder Eddas – if you can find them. Confusion
and complexity. Hideous complexity, by God.'
  'I am glad you invited me tonight,' Danlo said. 'But I had
hoped to find ... other things.'
 'You'll find what you'll find. But be careful, Little Fellow.
Most often, people find what they want to find.'
  'Have you ever known me not to be careful?' Danlo asked.
'Don't make jokes,' Bardo said. 'Be careful of yourself.
539
And be careful of Hanuman. I don't like what he did just now,
this face reading trickery, what he said about you. Ah, the way
he said it. He's fallen crueller, these last five years.'
  They went into the music room, then. The others had seated
themselves on futons in front of a low wooden stage. From time
to time, on concert nights, musicians would set their gosharps
and pianos on this stage and play music for Bardo's guests, but
now it was being used for other purposes. It had been laid out
with various objects which might attract the eye or excite the
senses. Someone had nearly covered it with vases of flowers.
There were golden candelabra and long, tapering candles. At the
stage's centre stood a high table holding up a golden urn and a
gleaming blue bowl. And behind the table, half hidden by snow
dahlias and drooping nitsa blossoms, was an instrument or robot
of a kind that Danlo had never seen before. It was a glittering
thing of quartz tubes and valves and gurgling chemicals and
neurologics. As Danlo sat cross-legged on the futon that
Hanuman had reserved for him, he nodded his head at this
bizarre instrument and asked, 'What is that?'
  'An odour synthesizer,' Hanuman said coldly. The
remembrancers use them.'
  They had the position of honour at the centre of the front
row; on Danlo's left was Surya Surata Lal, who was sitting on
her heels in a tense and formal manner. Next to her sprawled
Kolenya Mor, plump and nervous inside her billowing blue robes,
and all across the front row, and in the rows behind them,
curving around the stage, were women and men shifting and
settling into their futons, waiting for the remembrance to
begin. For Danlo, who had participated in many rituals in many
churches, there was something familiar about the music room.
And yet there was something strange, too. There were too many
people for intimacy, he thought, but too few to feed each
other's fires and create a true religious passion. The
540
windowless room was too dark, too quiet, too full of private
hopes and expectations. From somewhere behind him came the
sound of dripping water. He smelled wet stone and moss, the
rich reek of freshly cut earth. Then Bardo glided into the
room, followed by a handsome and noble-looking man wearing the
silver robe of a remembrancer.
 'Friends and colleagues, fellow seekers,' Bardo said as he
promenaded back and forth in front of the stage, 'may I present
the master remembrancer, Thomas Rane? He and I will guide
tonight's remembrance.'
  Thomas Rane stood almost on top of Danlo, and he bowed
deeply. He had a fine head of black hair which had run to
silver around his temples; he was a proud man, Danlo thought,
and slightly arrogant, but also a man whose eyes were bright
and sad with a deep understanding of human beings. He stepped
up to the stage and began to light the candles. There were
three candelabra, thirty-three candles to light, and Danlo
couldn't help thinking that his father had been thirty-three
years old when he supposedly had ascended to heaven.
  Just then Bardo sat down at the edge of the stage, and he
steepled his fingers beneath his chin as he rested his elbows
atop his huge belly. He leaned toward Hanuman and Danlo.
'Everyone asks me how the Ringess became a god. Did he become a
god, they ask? A real god? How is it possible for a human being
to become a god, eh?'
  'Perhaps it is not possible,' Danlo said. He was suddenly
aware that Surya, and others, were looking at him as if they
regretted his invitation to the remembrance.
'Oh?' Bardo said. 'Please explain yourself.'
 'The Cybernetic Churches,' Danlo said, 'teach that human
beings may not become gods. Cannot. Except for Nikolos Daru
Ede. They say Ede carked his selfness into a computer and
became the only true god but... none may follow his path.'
 Bardo stroked his beard and nodded his head before calling
out, 'Are there any Architects here tonight? Do any
541
 of you accept the basic doctrines of Edeism? No? Ah, that's
just as well, else what I'm about to say might get me
assassinated.'
 Upon the utterance of this word, Danlo and Hanuman exchanged
a quick, meaningful look. It had been five years since the
deaths of Pedar Sadi Sanat and the warrior-poet who had been
sent to assassinate Hanuman. In all that time, neither of them
had discussed this tragedy, nor had a day passed in which the
memory of it had left their minds.
  Hanuman turned to Bardo and laughed harshly. He said, 'I was
born into a Cybernetic Church – you should know, you've already
said enough for an elder to order your assassination.'
  'Well, let me say more, then.' Bardo smiled as he held up
two fat fingers. The Architects are wrong in at least two ways.
You can't become a god by carking your goddamned soul into a
computer. But there's a way that you can become a god, anyone.
And that's the way of the Ringess.'
 Someone behind Danlo, a sceptical old hibakusha who had lived
too long, asked, 'How are you defining this concept of
godhood?'
  'I'm not here to define anything,' Bardo said. 'I didn't
invite you here tonight to argue theology. As I've stated,
again and again until my lips are numb, it's not our task to
correct the doctrines of Edeism, as false and pernicious as
they are, nor are we here to start a new religion. By God,
hasn't humanity had its bellyful of religions? No, we're here,
together, to remembrance the Elder Eddas. A simple but deep
experience, this remembrancing. The great secret. It's inside
each of us, coded into our goddamned chromosomes, a way toward
immortality. A way to develop new senses. A way that the body
and brain can continue to grow, vaster, toward the infinite
things. That's the way of Mallory Ringess. I was his friend,
and I know. Someday – this is a promise he made to me – someday
542
he'll return to Neverness, and then you'll see what it's like
to be a god and follow the Way of Ringess.'
  He looked across the stage at Thomas Rane, whose face glowed
with the light of thirty-three flickering candles. 'Master Rane
will introduce you to a few, ah, simple techniques,' Bardo
said. 'And then we'll begin our remembrance.'
 Thomas Rane walked across the stage and sat down by Bardo's
side. He had a sensitive, serious face, and when he spoke, it
was with a grave and serious voice. There are sixty-four
attitudes to remembrancing,' he said. 'Although it will be
impossible for you to learn all these attitudes tonight, I will
say something about each of them.'
  He proceeded, then, to deliver a serious and fascinating
exposition of the remembrancer's art. He quickly dispensed with
the more basic attitudes such as association memory, imaging,
sequencing and logic memory. These attitudes are fundamental to
many professions, and he didn't want to bore his audience. As
the room filled with the whisperlike sounds of a Fravashi song
drug, he talked about mnemonics, mythopoesis and gestalt. He
talked for a long while. It was obvious, from the way he spoke,
that he had a reverence for his art. Danlo thought he was a
reverent man, at least in the surface calmness of his face and
in his cool grey eyes. 'We believe that the Elder Eddas are
coded into our chromosomes,' he said. 'It's possible to use the
recurrence attitude as a doorway to DNA memory. We've developed
a simplified technique to accomplish this.'
 Kolenya Mor, squirming about on her futon, looked up at him
and said, 'A difficult technique.'
'Difficult for some people, at first,' Surya Surata Lal said.
  'It's difficult, I admit,' Thomas Rane said. 'But the
memories are always there. All the memories of one's life. And
the other memories, too. Memory can be occulted but never
destroyed. Can you remember this?'
'I will try,' Kolenya said, wryly.
543
  'Just so,' Thomas Rane replied. Then let's remember down the
DNA.'
 He stood up and joined Bardo by the table at the centre of
the stage. He gave Bardo a slight head bow.
  'Let's remember down the DNA,' Bardo said in his melodious
voice, and the people in the room picked up this saying as if
it were a chant, repeating, 'Let's remember down the DNA.' The
music room had been made to reflect and deepen sounds, and the
sound of thirty-eight human voices, for a few moments, drowned
out the quieter Fravashi song drug. Then Bardo clapped his
hands, once. The room filled with a Japanese tone poem, which
seemed to float in the air like a strand of pearls. The lovely,
murmuring music instantly brought Danlo back to the time in Old
Father's house when he had learned to play the shakuhachi and
he had entered into the dreamtime of his people. He sat there
on his futon, remembering other musics of his childhood:
Haidar's skin-covered drum beating to the howl of the west
wind; his found-mother singing lullabies over the light of the
oilstones; the sacred chant of the Song of Life that he had
learned only incompletely. Music surrounded him and beat inside
his chest. He stared up past Hanuman, looking for the source of
this music. The walls, he saw, were sheets of vibrating organic
crystals. But the music seemed not to emanate from the walls,
nor from any other point in space or time; rather it sounded
everywhere at once, as if each air particle carried whole
tones, and progressions of tones. He dwelt in this music for a
long time, remembering. He could not have said how long he
listened, for it seemed that the whole of the tone poem was
bound up inside each silvery note, and each note was beautiful,
deep, and eternal.
 'Let's remember,' a deep voice called out. Danlo looked up at
the stage to see Bardo bending over the table. The huge man
reached forward and grasped the handles of a golden urn. Then
Thomas Rane moved forward and picked up the blue bowl from the
table. He held it in his open
544
hands, waiting. Into the bowl Bardo poured a clear liquid that
looked like water. But it was not water; it was kalla, the
remembrancers' drug. The remembrancers had spent five thousand
years developing it from such sources as the sacred mushrooms
of Old Earth, alien plants, and synthetics modelled after the
information molecules which are grown inside the cybernetic
spaces. Drinking kalla, the remembrancers say, is like clearing
a window of frost in Order to see another world, the forgotten
realms of experience buried beneath the snowdrifts of memory.
 'Let's form a circle,' Bardo said. Thomas Rane handed the
bowl of kalla back to him, and he stepped off the stage. Danlo
stood up, and Hanuman, and then everyone in the room was
standing, making a circle over and around the futons. Thomas
Rane and Bardo made their way to the circle's centre. This is
kalla,' Bardo said as he held the blue bowl up for everyone to
see. He caught Danlo's eye and began to chuckle. Take one sip,
and flee God. Two sips to see God. Three sips and you'll be
God.'
 So saying he lifted the bowl to his mouth and drank the
kalla. He wiped his lips on the back of his hand. 'Please, take
two sips,' he warned. 'No more, no less.'
  He passed the bowl to Thomas Rane, who took two quick sips
before passing it on to Surya. She received the bowl into her
hands as if it were made of eggshell and might break at the
slightest touch. Her little red eyes were lit up like wood
coals, and she held the bowl's blue edge up to her little lips.
In this way, passing from lip to lip and hand to hand, the bowl
made its way around the circle. By chance, Hanuman was the next
to last person to drink the kalla. He held the bowl in his
cupped hands as he turned to his left and looked at Danlo, who
was standing close to him.
  'Drink!' Bardo said. 'It's not poison, you know. Drink and
let's be done.'
 Hanuman's fingers slid up around the side of the bowl. He
performed this subtle movement so that only Danlo
545
could see it, the three orange-gloved fingers held against the
gleaming blue porcelain. It was a signal, Danlo realized, a
challenge. There was challenge in the stiffness of Hanuman's
body, in the way he threw his chin back and took three large
swallows of the kalla. Danlo watched his neck tense up three
times, just as he watched the hard knot of his Adam's apple
jumping up and down in his throat as if it were an animal
trying to escape a trap. And all the while, Hanuman's hellish
eyes never left his own; he gazed at Danlo in a silent
challenge that might have said: 'You're bold enough when
playing hokkee and risking all kinds of physical death, but can
you face the wilderness of perils that devours the mind?'
  With a sly smile he passed the bowl to Danlo, who was the
last to drink from it. Danlo touched his tongue to the kalla
and took a long, deep drink, and then another. It tasted both
cool and bitter. Because he was in a wild mood, out of his
devotion to wildness, he took a third sip. In truth, he drank
much more than a sip; three times altogether he did this, and
there was no way to tell how much of the kalla drug he
swallowed. When he was done he looked at Hanuman, who was
standing close, shoulder to shoulder, and watching him in his
intense but anguished way. Haw he hates this blessed drug,
Danlo thought. How he hates this ceremony. He looked around the
circle, then, and he was amazed that thirty-seven civilized
people could suffer such a shared and intimate touching of
their lips to the bitter kalla.
 'Sit down, now,' Bardo called out. Among the futons he
strutted as if the kalla were rocket fuel powering his limbs.
He was almost dancing with the energy of something beyond
himself. He moaned and laughed and shook his head. His eyes
rolled right and left, his great, soulful, brown eyes. Then he
threw his hand up to his forehead; he closed his eyes and said,
'Ah, mmmm, yes, there it is. Do you see it? All of you sit down
before you fall down, the memories will soon begin. We'll guide
you through the layers. Begin
 546
 with your first childhood memory. You may use the imaging
attitude, or olfaction, if you'd like, to bring it to mind.'
 Everyone returned to their futons then. Danlo sat down too
hard, and he felt the shaft of his shakuhachi gouge into his
thigh. Always, he kept the bamboo flute shoved down into the
long pocket of his pants, where most people stow their skate
blades after leaving the ice. He slid the shakuhachi out of his
pocket. He pressed its ivory mouthpiece to his lips. Many times
since Old Father had given him this gift, he had used its
intense, piercing sound to send him into reveries. But he made
no music that night, for Hanuman was next to him, watching, and
he knew well how his friend hated the breathy cry of the
shakuhachi. There was really no need for such music, he
thought, nor even the lost music of the Handel which Bardo had
brought back from his journeys and now reverberated throughout
the room. Already, inside him, the memories were forming up,
great waves of memory that rushed through his mind and broke
upon the lens of his inner eye. He beheld these memories, and
he listened to them, to the sounds. His heart was a beating
organ of sound that pumped a rich blood music into all the
cells of his body. The skin of his face burned, and his fingers
dripped sweat into the holes of the shakuhachi's bone-yellow
shaft. He felt wild and wary and full of wonder, all at the
same time. Had he wanted to stop the tide of memory, he could
not have, nor could he understand why anyone would ever wish to
do so. He could not understand how Bardo and Thomas Rane kept
their feet as they walked about the room, here whispering
helpful words into a woman's ear, there touching a man's closed
eyelids, or the arteries of someone's throat, or placing hand
upon rising belly to help with the breathing and to quell the
fear of the inner world, the lost world of experience and
remembrance. Perhaps, Danlo thought, one became immune to kalla
after consuming it many times; or perhaps Bardo and his master
remembrancer had merely faked the
547
drinking of it, and were as free from memory as lumps of stone.
  'We're all children inside,' Bardo said. His voice sounded
distant, as if it were falling off the rocks of a sea cliff far
away. And yet the words were close to Danlo, like hot breath in
his ear. 'We're all children now, folded up into babe, into
fetus and embryo and egg, back into our goddamned DNA. Find the
way you're folded, and you'll find the Elder Eddas.'
   Danlo closed his eyes, and he immediately smelled milk, rich
mother's milk all warm and slippery and sweet. He guessed that
the smell was wafting out of the synthesizer, but he could not
be sure. In the music room the air was hung with pungent smells
of no particular direction, or rather, smells that pointed in
thirty-eight private, individual directions, straight through
the nostril and deep into the brain's smell centre. And there,
inside Danlo, as inside all non-engineered human beings, the
olfactory nerve fibres connected synapse to synapse with the
hippocampus and the almond-shaped amygdala, those ancient brain
structures which mediate the neuro-chemical storms of memory.
'We use smells to evoke the early memories,' Thomas Rane had
said. Danlo remembered him saying this, and he smelled milk,
and the memories that came then were so vivid and real it
seemed that he was an infant again, suckling and swallowing,
his nose pressed up against his found-mother's swollen breast.
Even as he sucked air through his nose and drank in his
mother's warm, seal-oil smell, he knew he was deep into the
recurrence attitude of remembrancing; in truth, he was not
really remembering at all, but rather reliving the moments of
his life.
 'There are many levels of memory,' he heard Thomas Rane say,
'and deepest of all is recurrence.'
 I am two years old. Danlo thought, and he opened his eyes.
In most people the earliest memories are like pieces of
548
 ice floating in a twilight sea: fragmented, disconnected and
hard to perceive. With difficulty these fragments can be
reconstructed into a semblance of past events, but this
reconstruction always wavers like a sea mirage and does not
satisfy. Danlo had been born with the rare 'memory of
pictures', an eidetic memory which imprinted the colour and
detail of objects seen, and then, at will, brought these
perfect images before the mind's eye. He had always been able
to see things more clearly than others, to remember, but even
he had never guessed that the images of recurrence could be so
intensely real.
I am always two years old.
 In truth, the eidetics' attitude is like a key unlocking the
door of recurrence, an opening into sights and sounds that
cannot be destroyed. Danlo opened himself to reliving the
moments of his life, and he saw with all his senses. There was
light, then, the soft yellow light of oilstones filling up a
cave. The light was everywhere, and it touched everything. The
cave's curving rock walls and his busy little hands and his
mother's face were suddenly blazing with light. He was curled
up naked in his mother's lap, deep in soft white furs and the
warm smells of his mother's body. Sitting close by the
oilstones were other people, his near-brothers and sisters,
Rosalehe and Yoshi and Arri, and he could see them clearly,
their faces, their brilliant brown eyes and each of the
thousands of hair follicles erupting from their sun-burnt skin.
They spoke liquid, musical words that he could barely
comprehend, but that he, Danlo wi Soli Ringess, in the
timelessness of his remembrance, recognized all too clearly:
'Ali, pela Ali, losa li pelasa i hallasa Ayeye.' Yes, God was
truly a blessed and beautiful silver thallow, but Danlo could
see, even with his two-year-old eyes, that God was also
something other. Moments earlier, on the far side of the cave,
his brother Choclo had finished painting a picture of God.
Everyone was looking at it. God's painted feathers blazed
silver against black stone. God's wings were outstretched to
beat the air, and in his great
549
 black talons he clutched a moon, one of the six silver moons
that circled the planet. And God's eyes were black and fierce,
and God was dying to hook its beak into the moon, to tear it
into pieces and devour it. Gazing at this brilliant painting
made Danlo's eyes lock with fear. The fear rippled in waves
through his body down into his scrotum. He could feel perfectly
what it would be like when the great thallow's beak ripped open
his belly. He grasped his hands over his navel then and he
screamed, and the sound of his own voice was as high and wild
as a thallow's, and that was the most frightening thing of all,
this terrible scream. There, in his mother's lap, he was
sobbing in terror, in hatred, in pain. There, too, his
awestruck mother bent over him, touching him. She touched his
hands, his belly, the skin above his throbbing heart; she
touched the tears away from his face. This image he saw and
felt with all the cells of his body. He marvelled at the way
image connected to emotion, to the feeling of intense love his
mother's voice and fingers called up in him. He had long
forgotten this love, the warm and liquid pleasure of it deep in
his blood. But now he lived the child inside him again, and his
delight was pure and timeless. He was connected not memory to
event, but rather joy to joy, and lip to lip, connected
directly with the spacetime of a singular moment as his mother
kissed his mouth, his forehead, his burning eyes. That was the
wonder of recurrence, he thought, the way this intense reliving
of himself connected him with the source of his life and being.
And at the centre of his deep self was just pure laughter. He
had always known this, but now he felt his belly opening to
waves of laughter. His brothers and sisters gathered in close,
standing over him as they dug their fishy-smelling fingers into
his ribs and belly, tickling him out of his terror. Laughter
the holiest state and brings one closest to God – he remembered
this saying as he convulsed in laughter and kicked about on his
mother's lap. There, in the music room, he lay back upon his
futon convulsing in remem-
550
brance, and the swells of love and laughter overwhelmed him.
I will always be two years old.
  He heard a voice whispering this, and he recognized it as a
truth. He had a clear and compelling sense that all the events
of his life (and, perhaps, of the universe) were eternal and
folded up in each present moment of time. He could almost see
the folding. He listened to the sound of his laughter and
followed it backward into himself, into all the selves he had
ever been. This was a classic remembrancing technique. Making
this journey was something like a snake swallowing its tail, or
like a child trying to crawl back into the bloody womb of time.
And in the deepness of experience and life, there was always
terror. Always, each seeker of remembrance reached a moment of
supreme terror. This moment, like a sharpened wooden stake
buried in a snow-trap, might be embedded within any layer of
memory, but it was always there. As Danlo relived the laughter
of his infancy, he thought he had escaped the worst of terrors,
but it was not so. He was only stepping nearer and nearer to
it. He suddenly sensed it beneath him, hidden by the thin and
icy crusts of memory. It was essential, he had been told, to
relive the moment of his birth, but he suddenly knew that this
was impossible.
  'No!' he heard himself shout. He lay writhing on his futon,
with fists clenched and muscles cramping as he convulsed in
terror. 'No ... I cannot!'
 Almost immediately, Thomas Rane was kneeling over him,
massaging his knotted limbs. Danlo could feel the pressure of
his long, skilful hands and hear his voice, but he could not
see him because his eyes were shut much too tightly to open.
  'Danlo wi Soli Ringess,' Thomas Rane said, 'you're fleeing
yourself.'
 'Take one sip of kalla and flee God,' Danlo whispered. 'But I
took ... more than one sip.'
551
 'Very well, but the drug cannot take you where you will not
go.'
 'It should be so easy,' Danlo said. They say I was born
laughing. The laughter should carry me back to the first
moment, yes?'
'It's always hard to remember your birth.'
  'It is so close. I can almost see it. Almost be ... there,
the blessed moment.'
'You must force yourself, Young Pilot.'
 'No, I cannot. If I was born laughing, truly, the holiest
consciousness ... Once I've returned, I could never leave it
again, don't you see?'
  Thomas Rane touched Danlo's eyelids, then, and with
difficulty he opened his eyes. He turned his head. Next to him,
on his blue futon, Hanuman lay still as a corpse. All around
the music room were women and men lying straight and still,
frozen into the position of remembrance.
  'Ah, what's wrong?' This came from Bardo, who stepped across
the room lightly and carefully. He, too, knelt by Danlo's
futon, and his eyes were like bottomless brown pools.
 'He's reached the fleeing stage,' Thomas Rane said. His face
was grave and impassive, as if he thought that a master
remembrancer should always wear such a face.
'And what is he fleeing?'
  'His birth. He's been told – and he believes – that he was
born laughing.'
'Ah,' Bardo said. 'Ahhh.'
'We must take him through it.'
'Must we?'
 'He's told us enough,' Thomas Rane said. 'We might be able to
use word keys, now.'
'Words?'
'To force him back to the image storm.'
  'But is that wise? By God, look at him! He's gone back
faster than any of the others.'
552
 'Who remembrances faster, remembrances farther,' Thomas Rane
said.
 'Well, let him go straight back, then, as far as he can. He
can remembrance his birth some other time.'
  Danlo looked straight into Bardo's eyes, and he saw that he
too was deep in remembrance. Although he thought it was
impossible that Bardo could have witnessed his birth, he sensed
that the huge man was reliving the images of it, even as he
smiled sadly and looked Danlo eye to eye. Friends who drank
kalla together sometimes claimed they shared an almost
telepathic remembrance. Danlo lost himself in Bardo's deep
eyes, and he wondered if Bardo could be pulling lost images out
of his mind.
'Go back if you can, Little Fellow,' Bardo said.
 'If we circumvent the proper sequencing,' Thomas Rane said,
'he may remembrance the Eddas imperfectly.'
  'Well, by God, has anyone but Mallory Ringess ever
remembranced them perfectly?'
  Thomas Rane smiled, then removed a blue vial from the pocket
of his robe. He held it so Danlo could see it.
'Am I to have more kalla, sir?'
 'No,' Thomas Rane said, 'this isn't kalla. It's water. Just
plain sea water. Please open your mouth.'
 Danlo lay back with his mouth open as Thomas Rane opened the
vial and used its dropper to let a little water fall onto his
tongue. Instantly, the essence of pure salt burst through his
mouth.
 'It tastes saltier than the sea,' Danlo murmured. 'Almost
like blood.'
  'Smell and taste are almost the same sense,' Thomas Rane
said. Taste the ocean, inside; this is what it was like before
you were born.'
'To live, I die,' Danlo whispered.
  'No, don't speak. Taste what's in your mouth, the ocean. You
were never born. Never-born, endless as the ocean – how can you
die?'
I am never-born, Danlo thought. I am not I.
553
   He closed his eyes and lay back as he crossed his arms over
his chest. As he rolled onto his side, he drew his knees up
over his belly. He slept for a long time. He was two hundred
days old, and he slept and dreamed frequently: dark, rhythmic,
peaceful dreams. When he awoke at last, his mouth was thick
with warm salt water, the ageless taste of the sea. He was
floating in a lightless sea inside his mother's womb. In truth,
the idea of lightlessness had no meaning, for he had never seen
light, nor could he imagine that he might someday develop a
sense of vision. There was only darkness, an undifferentiated
darkness as black and seamless as deep space. It absorbed him
so totally that he was unaware of it. But he could hear sounds:
the gas gurgling and squeaking through his mother's bowels, the
muscles pulsing in peristaltic waves, his mother's heart
booming everywhere in the water around him. His own heart beat
more quickly, and he could hear that too, just as he could feel
the river of nourishment streaming in through his belly. Along
a slippery, coiled tube, blood flowed into him and quickened
him; he was conscious of very little, but even now, a
never-born manchild floating in a vast ocean, he had a burning
sense of his own life. And yet, paradoxically, he had no life
of his own for he was wholly connected to the deepest tissues
of his mother's body. Near him, across the layers of the
placenta, he felt the womb arteries pulsing with blood. It was
a magical and numinous thing, this ancient connection of blood.
It seized him and pulled at him, just as he seized the
nutrients from his mother's body. I am not I, he remembered.
He was all water and fat and urgent cells organizing themselves
into something new; he was muscle and memory and skin, and yet
he could not quite tell where the boundaries of his flesh gave
way to the long, dark roar of his mother's womb. He swallowed
amniotic water and he breathed it into his lungs, and he sensed
that he had no boundaries. Like a drop of water melting into
the sea, even as his blood interchanged carbon dioxide and
oxygen with the blood of his
  554
 mother, he felt himself growing ever vaster, ever fuller,
surging outward into infinite possibilities.
  I am infinite memory.
   He fell deep into recurrence, and he relived all the shapes
of himself since the moment he had been conceived. Each cell of
his body was woven with the memory of its origins, and all of
his cells, blood, belly and brain, remembered their genesis
within himself. He was a curled-up knot of urgent possibilities
no larger than a baldo nut; he was a quivering ball of cells,
dividing and redividing, furiously organizing themselves into
liver, stomach and heart; he was a single cell, a fertilized
egg, a union of sex cells made inside both mother and father.
He would always be that cell, and he suddenly knew that he was
a completion, a union in ecstasy, a miracle of trillions upon
trillions of chemical events connecting back to the moment of
life's creation.
  All living things are conscious, he remembered. He was
nothing but consciousness, the life consciousness of a single
cell. Inside him was violence of metabolism, mitochondria
ripping hydrogen atoms off glucose molecules, enzymes exploding
through plasma, but inside, too, was a peacefulness more
perfect than anything he had ever known. I that I am. He was
hunger, simple and pure, an overwhelming urge to eat and grow.
And, at the same moment, he lived in the silent joy of floating
down an endless tube, floating and touching and tasting the
sugars which sweetened the waters all around him. For the first
and perhaps last time in his life, he was a perfect harmony of
being and becoming. To seize the free-floating molecules of
alanine and trytophan and other amino acids and to feel them
diffuse through his membranes was to know halla, and something
more, to feel quickening inside himself a perfect and terrible
will to life. He marvelled at this will, this love, this
complete affirmation of living. It would be many days yet
before he developed throat, mouth and lips, but if he had been
able to give voice to all that he knew,
  555
the only words he could have spoken were: 'Yes, I will.' That,
he remembered, was what the consciousness of a zygote was
like, what it would always be like.
   All things are in consciousness; the memory of all things is
in things.
  He might have been content, for a very long time, to remain
himself as this single cell. But as he consumed sugars, amino
acids, and rich lipid molecules, he felt himself swelling,
growing vaster, becoming ready to divide in two. He feared this
division, and yet he longed for it, for he could never
experience all the beauties of human life as this single,
swollen cell. He was too full of himself, and this was a kind
of pain tearing apart his deepest membranes. There, at the
centre of his self, inside his nucleus, was an awareness of
pain and the memory of life. He felt it twisting and uncoiling,
this long, ageless molecule of memory. His DNA was the most
alive and holy part of him. It was always in motion, bending,
twisting, and vibrating, a billion times each second. It rang
inside him like a bell announcing the miracle of creation. And
now the ringing was loud and unmistakable, and the sound of it
shivered outward in waves through his cytoplasm. And now the
almost infinitely long strand of DNA was unfurling, splitting
like a zipper down the middle, replicating, creating more life.
In the DNA's endless string of codons, as they opened up, was
the secret of life.
The secret of life is more life.
   DNA was designed to make more of itself and to arrange amino
acids into proteins, into the very stuff of life. All the cells
that he might become, through birth and boyhood, down to his
final old age, would bear the signature of this DNA. And they
would bear something else, too. Part of his chromosomes, where
the DNA was ancient and usually silent, coded for the assembly
of unique and rare proteins.
Memory is chemistry: chemistry is memory.
He was twenty-one years old, and he would always be
556
twenty-one years old, and the memory molecules flooded the
deepest parts of his brain. He tried to visualize these
molecules, the proteins bent and folded into patterns of
hideous complexity. Could memory, he wondered, truly be coded
into chains of valine, cysteine and aspartic acid? Was his
brain simply reading the memories coded there? Or were these
molecules only chemical keys fitting into his neurons,
unlocking the great remembrances that would always exist inside
him?
Memory is memory is memory is...
  In truth, no one had ever understood the mystery of memory.
The remembrancers, for five thousand years, had theorized that
memory is like water locked up in ice, or like information
coded in bits inside a computer, or like a hologram. It was
said that a race of gods, the Ieldra, long ago had tampered
with the human genome and had carked all their knowledge into
man's most ancient DNA. All their memories: the Elder Eddas
were said to be nothing other than pure memory, but no one knew
what they truly were or how it was that a woman or man could
remember them.
Memory is.
 A black hole spinning stars and stars and stars swallowing
light out of blackness in blackness velvet bellywomb
annihilating creating jewels of light and stars and planets
preserved glittering bluewhite light spacetime distortions and
gravity light locked in matter is light is light is light light
light light.
  The great memories came, then, and Danlo lay still as he let
them wash through him. The Elder Eddas welled up inside him
like an onstreaming of pure consciousness, or rather, a single,
vast, eternal memory, as pure as the ocean. And yet, like the
ocean in a storm, the Eddas were murky and multiple, great
waves of memory swelling and breaking and reforming for a
moment, only to burst into spray and fall back into the ocean's
wild waters. The Elder Eddas were like drops of water, infinite
in number, sparkling bits of knowledge, forbidden technologies
and new logics,
557
 philosophies beyond counting, mathematics, languages and
theories of the universe. The Elder Eddas were memories of
religious movements, of the genesis of stars, and of strange
alien yearnings, and of the love (and fear) that all life has
for other life. The dreams and agonies of ancient civilizations
were written there, and the memories of the gods. He relived
the death of a galaxy out beyond the Ursa Major Cloud of
galaxies, and he watched the stars of the Rosette Nebula being
born. To remembrance the Eddas was to walk across alien
landscapes, worlds of ochre and violet dust spinning in the
light of red giant stars. And worlds of fire, worlds of ice,
worlds constructed inside godlike computers, perfect
crystalline worlds built up of endless strata of pure
information. Much of the Elder Eddas was a memory of one race's
journey godward. The secret of immortality was a part of this
memory, deep and dark as an underwater cavern. Another part was
a design for new senses, an extension of the aesthetic and
philosophical senses that Danlo knew as plexure, fugue and
shih. Without these senses, it would be impossible to apprehend
the universe, in all its strange and infinite beauty. A god
must have a sublime sense of beauty and so, encoded within the
Eddas were a thousand concepts of beauty, as variegated and
vivid as a painter's colours. Deep in the deepest of memory
storms, Danlo tried to imagine what wonders the universe might
unfold, but he could not see with a god's senses, not yet. And
thus he could not truly understand. He could not understand the
Ieldra's mathematics of the continuum, the paradoxicality of
time and no-time, which were stranger than ever he had dreamed.
Nor could he grasp of the calculus of systems, the
connectedness theorems, the way in which all life and all
ecological systems everywhere were related to one another. In
truth, the Elder Eddas were hideously complex, a boiling chaos
of memories, and he understood only a portion of them. He was a
man ravished with thirst, like a seal hunter stranded on an
ice-floe, contenting himself with a few sips
558
 of snowmelt while the great ocean of truth roared all around
him.
 At the centre of the galaxy was a black hole, spinning ...
 He sank into the softness of his futon as he tried to
understand his memories. The Elder Eddas came into his mind in
the form of voices, musics, images, and brilliant dramas. Much
of this memory a part of him automatically encoded into words,
or into the symbols of the universal syntax, or even into
mathematics. This was a way toward grasping the ungraspable, a
highly formal and abstract way. But gradually, as he descended
deeper into the memories inside him, he became aware of another
way. His nascent sense of iconicity – the ability to see
equations, theorems, information, or ideas as vivid icons –
gradually quickened. He remembered very well that there was a
great black hole spinning at the centre of the galaxy, where
the stars were thick and brilliant as diamond clusters around a
ring. He remembered almost perfectly the mathematics of black
holes. He remembered so intensely and vividly that he began to
understand gravity not through symbols or the elegant
mathematical ideas encoded as symbols, but rather as something
like a grave and heavy 'face' that was completely familiar to
him. This transformation of idea into image was eerie and
frightening. He marvelled at the way Schwarzschild geodesies
flowed into cheek-planes, the spinors transfigured themselves
as eyebrows, and the tensor fields spread out and grew into the
forehead of this blazing, inner face. He saw the naked
singularities as brilliant black eyes staring out at him and
drinking in whole galaxies of light. But most compelling of all
was the way the Lavi Curve became as one with the face's mouth,
the smiling mouth, the blessed and terrible mouth whose lips
were turned upward in mysterious laughter. The image of this
face was as real to him as the memory of the cave into which he
had been born. He could see its blackness opening up into the
blackness of night, could feel its intense gravity pulling at
his cells and
559
hear the echoes of the universe inside. The memories that came
to him, then, consisted of a billion such faces graven with
the expression of all possible knowledge. Some of these faces
he had to struggle to see. Some were more like archetypes or
ancestral dreams than faces, and these he knew as deeply as
his own scarred countenance which stared back at him whenever
he looked into a mirror. But most of the iconic faces were
utterly alien, and they flickered inside him at an impossible
speed. This flickering caused the faces to merge together so
that it seemed a single, dynamic face was weeping and singing
and dancing, continually evolving toward some unknown shape.
This, he thought, was the unfinished face of the universe, all
clear-eyed and fierce and shimmering with a terrible beauty.
  What is the colour of the night? What was your face before
you were born?
   Once, when he was a young novice, he had tried to identify a
picture of his family in the seemingly chaotic colours and
shapes of a simple foto. Through the sheer force of his will
he had succeeded. But now he had to apprehend an endless
sequence of thoughtscapes, idea complexes, and alien
sensibilities, to view and understand these memories through a
sense that he did not yet fully possess. This heightened
vision and new consciousness nearly overwhelmed him. In truth,
it was infinitely more difficult to make sense of the Elder
Eddas than the faces of a foto.
 At the centre of the galaxy was a great black hole, spinning
around and around a point of singular and infinite density. The
black hole was like a belly – or like a womb – of infinite
blackness. Its intense gravity had pulled many stars down
toward its centre, pulled them apart into leptons and photons,
annihilating them. And yet paradoxically, in the black hole's
tremendous time distortions, each star was perfectly preserved,
ten thousand glittering flung against an event horizon of black
velvet. Each star was an exploding mass of two billion trillion
trillion grams of
560
 matter; locked in matter was energy and light. The black hole
was an organ for the creation of infinite streams of light.
Someday, at the still point of the black hole's centre where
all was eternity and silence, a whole universe of light would
burst forth into time. That was the true secret of the gods,
the way light created more and ever more brilliant light.
   But the most brilliant of human beings could understand this
secret only imperfectly, and most men and women, hardly at
all. For many long and harrowing moments, as a hunter trying
to break free of a sarsara's blinding snows, Danlo approached
the threshold of a new way of seeing. Guiding him on this
journey, above all other things, were his wildness and his
will. He had an intense will to seeing, a will to live new
experiences and new worldviews. He was quite ready to abandon
all that he knew, including himself, in order to behold the
Elder Eddas. And so he made difficult associations and
startling connections between impossible ideas and phenomena,
and he remembered things that few other human beings had ever
remembered. He almost understood the connection of matter to
memory, could almost see it, the way memory is locked up
inside matter's terrible symmetry. He could almost see the
dazzling, undifferentiated oneness of the universe as it
eternally differentiated itself, falling into time, willing
and becoming and evolving. And thus he almost understood the
important thing about gods, which is that they must
continually create, or die. They must create themselves. All
gods, especially the Ieldra, regard creation as the supreme
work of art. And so every moment they create themselves from
the stuff of the universe, and create the universe in their
marvellous, eternal memories.
Oh God oh God oh God....
 God is memory, Danlo thought, and he realized a truth about
the Ieldra, that race of gods who had carked their memories
inside human beings and carked their consciousnesses into the
black hole at the centre of the galaxy. The taste of the Elder
Eddas was salt on his tongue, and the
561

 sound of the universe was a great wave swelling up inside
him. For a moment, he knew all there was to know. Then the
memories built to a wild, white roar; they crested and broke,
crushing him under an infinite weight of remembrance. He could
neither see, nor hear, nor feel, nor breathe, nor even think.
He was aware of himself as made up of a billion billion
memories that shimmered like drops of light and dissolved into
an ocean of memory, the cool, clear, single memory that lies
deep inside all things. He might have died to this one memory
and spent an eternity absorbed in it. But he recalled, then,
that there was a place where memories are continually created
out of hunger and passion and pain, a whole universe of life,
and he suddenly knew he had to return there, to tell Bardo and
Hanuman about the remembrance of the gods.
'Oh God, oh God, oh God!' he heard someone call out.
 In stages, like a turtle pulling himself from the ocean's
shallows up across a beach's frozen sands, he returned to the
music room. He opened his eyes and sat up. He touched the
feather in his hair, the scar above his eye, the sharp ivory
mouthpiece of his flute. Although it was very late and the
thirty-three candles had burned low, everything seemed ablaze
with light. And everything – the shatterwood floor tiles, the
flowers, the golden urn of kalla – all the material objects
within his sight called up memories. Memory was written into
all things, and he could not help seeing the connections, in
the grain of his shakuhachi, and in the lines of Hanuman's
pale, blood-flecked lips, and in his own long hands, which were
hard and weathered and burned brown from the bright false
winter sun. He might have fallen back into remembrance then,
but Bardo was kneeling beside him, squeezing the back of his
neck. Flecks of compassion danced in Bardo's eyes, and he said,
'Ah, Little Fellow, go slowly, now, and don't speak too soon.'
 But Danlo had to tell him what he had remembranced, the
essence of the Eddas, and he gasped out, 'Bardo, Bardo ... oni
tlo justoth!'
562
  'What did you say? It sounds like the gibberish that the
Fravashi teach.'
  Danlo recognized the words that flowed from his mouth as
ancient Moksha, and he wondered why (and how) he had translated
the Elder Eddas into such a language. Old Father, after all,
had never taught him ancient Moksha. Then he thought for a
moment and whispered, 'Listen, Bardo, this is important:
Nothing is lost.'
'Ah, perhaps, but what do you mean?'
  The memory of all things ... is in all things. The
mathematics of memory, the infinities and the paradoxes are
just– '
 Bardo nodded his head and announced, a little too
prematurely, 'You've had a clear memory of the Eddas, eh? It's
rare when anyone has a clear memory.'
  A red-faced man sitting near them overheard this exchange
and repeated it to a harijan woman. Danlo heard him say: 'He's
had a clear memory,' and then others began talking, passing
information back and forth. Almost everyone had returned to
waking consciousness. Around the room women and men were
sitting in ones and twos, staring off at the crystalline walls,
or listening to the lovely, floating music of the Debussy, or
talking together about their remembrances. All Danlo's senses
were afire, and he became aware of ten different tracks of
conversation, all at once. The experience of remembrancing had
terrified and confused many people, but even these were caught
up in a group excitement. The spirit of the moment was one of
exaltation and profound accomplishment, and it hung in the air
like an intoxicating drug. Many believed that they were the
initiators of a new direction in humanity's evolution. Many
sensed the species' possibilities within themselves, and
whether this was delusion or revelation was impossible to tell.
Danlo listened to the people in the music room, and this is
what he heard:
'... inevitability is the only way to describe ...'
563
  '... the feeling of total peacefulness must be the whole
...'
  '... for me it was like a fire burning up my brain and ...'
  '... how can anyone describe information coded into light?
...'
  '... I don't think I understood anything, my experience was
...'
  '... a dream, the Elder Eddas are a dream, and we're not
really ...'
  '... gods is what we might become, of course, and Mallory
Ringess ...'
  '... if the Eddas are instructions for becoming gods, then
...'
 '... after that I became a ball of light pulsing out of ...'
  '... the energy densities would have to be nearly infinite
...'
  '... and expanding or else it would just collapse into ...'
  '... a black hole at the centre of the galaxy which I fell
down ...'
  '... was so intense, the fetal stage, I had to return but
...'
  '... once the DNA transcription begins, no one could
remembrance ...'
 '... the Ieldra coded all of it into the DNA, the memories of
...'
'... infinite possibilities, but only a god could ...'
  '... remembrance too long and it's like being drunk with
fire ...'
  '... into madness if you stay in the memory space too long
...'
  '... look, even the son of the Ringess has returned, and
he's ...'
 '... Danlo wi Soli Ringess, they said his name was ...'
  '... wild, both of them, but only the cetic remains and he's
as ...'
564
'... a god, listen, if he's calling for God, he's lost in ...'
  '... the great remembrances, as rare as lightning striking
twice ...'
 '... the same place we were all trying to find but they've
seen ...'
'... God, oh God, oh God ...'
  Danlo looked over to see Hanuman rocking from side to side
on his futon, lying back and rocking as he moved his thin lips.
It was Hanuman, he realized, who had been crying out in his
remembrance, calling for God. His eyes were closed so tightly
that he seemed to be squinting; sweat beads rolled down his
cheeks, leaving streaks of water against his white skin. Danlo
leaned over to him and placed his hand over his friend's mouth.
Hanuman's lips were hard and hot. 'Shhh, mi mokashu la,
shantih, shantih,' Danlo said. 'Wake up, now, my brother, and
be at peace.'
  But Hanuman was locked into remembrance, and Bardo edged
over, then. He reached down to pull Danlo's hand away from
Hanuman's mouth. There, careful you don't smother him,' he
said. 'You won't bring him back by words, too bad.'
  Thomas Rane came over, and Surya Surata Lal, and others.
They stood in a circle over Danlo and Hanuman. They looked down
at them, and their eyes were full of candlelight and awe.
 'Who remembrances deepest, remembrances longest,' Kolenya Mor
said.
 'Well, Danlo has had a clear memory, and deep,' Bardo said.
 'It's plain that the journeymen, both of them, remembranced
too deeply,' Surya said. 'We've got to control these
experiences before someone dies of them.'
  'Quiet now,' Thomas Rane said. His face was calm, and the
silver fibres of his robe gleamed. 'No one has ever died from
remembrancing.'
Surya's little face tightened up and she said, 'I think the
565
young cetic drank too much kalla. Well, he was warned.'
'Take three sips of kalla and be God,' someone said.
 'We should have controls,' Surya huffed out. 'I've said that
before.'
  'I've never seen anyone remembrance this deeply,' Kolenya
Mor said. There was amazement in her voice. 'What must it be
like?'
  Thomas Rane knelt down next to Danlo and began working on
Hanuman's face muscles. But the massage did little good, for
Hanuman continued to cry out, and his words grew even more
pained and ominous: 'Everything is God, I am God, my God, my
God...'
 'Of course, it's not just the kalla, it's his own memories
that are eating him up,' Surya said, and she shot Danlo a
quick, sour look, as if to ask him why his friend should
suffer such deep memories.
 Hanuman's hands were locked together over his navel, and
Danlo covered them with his own hand. He looked up at a ring
of concerned faces, and a truth of the Elder Eddas came to
him. We are all food for God, he remembered. We are all –
 'So the young cetic is God now,' Surya said to Bardo. 'Well,
we've all been tempted to think that, haven't we?'
 'Ah,' Bardo said. 'No one should ever interpret another's
experience.'
 'But Mallory Ringess didn't become a god by remembrancing the
Elder Eddas,' Surya said. 'Not just by remembrancing them.'
  Danlo felt for the pulse in Hanuman's wrist, and he found
it, fast and quick like a bird's, rising up in fluttering waves
against his fingertips. Hanuman was still drowning in a wave of
memory, he thought, and he shut his eyes and let his own
memories run through him.
The universe is a womb for the genesis of gods.
  'We should try to bring the Ringess into our hearts,' Surya
said. 'We should let his compassion guide us. Remembrancing the
great knowledge means nothing with-
566
out the compassion to understand it. Mallory Ringess struggled
his whole life to find compassion, and we must find a way to
love and honour him for that, or we'll never follow his way.'
 Nadero devam arcayer, Danlo remembered. By none but a god...
  While the room echoed with the soothing music of flutes and
gosharps, Danlo opened his eyes to smile at Surya Lal. He took
a deep breath of air, and then said, 'By none but a god shall a
god be worshipped.'
  'No one has said anything about worship,' Surya told him.
 'But you speak of my father ... and there is worship in each
of your words. He was just a man. Now he is a god, it is said.
We may become gods, truly, but for a man or woman to worship
anything, that is the greatest sin.'
  'Is it a sin to follow the way that the Ringess showed
humanity?'
  'But there are many ways,' Danlo said. 'As many ways as
there are human beings.'
'We only know one way of becoming gods, Young Pilot.'
 'But would you rather become a god ... or God?'
  Surya glanced at Bardo, and she said, 'As my cousin has
repeatedly emphasized, we're not here to start a religion. I
don't know anything about God. I do know about one man's
immortality. The development of great powers, growth without
end. The Ringess spoke about this often, the possibilities of
humankind.'
Infinite possibilities.
 Danlo still held his hand over Hanuman's hands, and he felt
his friend's belly rise and fall with every breath. The rhythm
of it carried him back into remembrance, and as he stared at
the bloody flecks on Hanuman's lips, he thought about infinite
possibilities. With difficulty he spoke, half to Surya, half
to himself: 'It is possible to develop ... a new way of
seeing. Possible for anyone, man or god. I did not know this
earlier today, but I know it now. That is, I
567
 have always known it, but tonight, in the Eddas ... this new
sense. Call it yugen, that is the best word for it I know.
Yugen is ... a way of seeing behind surfaces, pine needles or
ice or words, the fragility even of the universe. Everything is
so fragile, our eyes, our breath, our mathematics, our stars.
Yet tough as diamond, eternal. The paradoxes. You cannot see
anything unless you can see how it is not a thing. Yugen is
seeing the connectedness of all things. The folding through
time, past into present, thereness into nowness. Matter is
memory, and DNA, and life, and in everyone it is all folded up,
the memories of the future. To see it, waiting ten billion
years to be created, the possibilities of evolution – you
cannot even begin to imagine the possibilities.'
  For a while, Danlo sat cross-legged and talked about the
Elder Eddas, or rather, told Surya and the others about his
experience of them. It was hard for him to describe the
indescribable, but quite a few people in the room had
remembranced the Eddas themselves, however shallowly, and they
seemed to understand much of what he said. At last Bardo stood
up and rested his hand atop Danlo's head. He looked down at
Hanuman, and then addressed the people gathered around him.
Their faces were written with excitement and expectancy. 'Danlo
wi Soli Ringess has had a great remembrance,' Bardo said.
That's clear, isn't it? Perhaps his friend has too. Few of us
have remembranced so deeply as the young cetic.'
 Just then Hanuman began to speak again, and his words were
cold knives ripping open the veils of time. For an instant,
Danlo saw the future fall open in a cascade of images, and the
vision of it cut him with dread and despair. 'I am God,'
Hanuman murmured, 'I am God, my God, I'm one, I'm the one, my
God, my God.' And then, after a space of silence, he cried out,
'No, no, no, no!'
  Danlo let go of Hanuman. He stood up, cupped his hands, and
whispered in Bardo's ear, 'What shall we do?
'Ah, Little Fellow, it will be all right,' Bardo said softly.
568
 And then, so that the others could hear him, in his most
reassuring voice, he said, The young cetic is not the first to
become lost in the memories. I, myself, and Thomas Rane, and
the other guides – we've all journeyed deeply. But there are
always ways back, techniques the remembrancers can apply, at
need. We'll take the young cetic to the Well, now. While we're
bringing him back, please remain here and review your memories.
It's been a night of great remembrance, by God!'
 So saying, he squatted down and lifted Hanuman up against his
belly. Bardo was endlessly strong and had no trouble carrying
him. Danlo thought Hanuman looked as small as a young boy in
his arms, small and fragile and sick with memories.
 'Thomas Rane!' Bardo called out. 'If you will, please
accompany us.'
 Thomas Rane and Bardo bowed their heads toward the urn of
kalla on the stage, and they bowed to the circle of people
still standing around Danlo. They bore Hanuman away to the
Well, which was a room of dark tanks and healing waters in the
deepest part of the house. Everyone returned to their futons,
then. Because the music room was now too quiet, Danlo put his
shakuhachi to his lips and began to play the long, deep notes
of a song Old Father had taught him, and the memories consumed
him.
We are all food for God.
  He knew this as part of a true remembrance, but whether or
not it was a great one, he could not yet say. He looked up at
the stage, at the urn gleaming golden against the black
lacquer table. The next time he was called to a rite of
remembrance, he promised himself he would again take three
sips of kalla.
569



CHAPTER NINETEEN

Dolls

 Every time consciousness contemplates itself, it must fall
into an infinite regress. At the end of this spiral into
neverness is God – or Hell. Hell was created when God gave
human beings the power to behold themselves, just as they
are.
 – from A Requiem For Homo Sapiens, by Horthy Hosthoh

 It was two full days before Danlo saw Hanuman again. As Tamara
had foretold, after the night of the joyance Danlo found
himself craving solitude, and he avoided talking to people. He
spent most of each day and night skating the streets, or
drinking chocolate alone in cafes, or sitting on the cold rocks
of North Beach, watching the waves roll in from the ocean and
burst against the icy shore. Although he was exhausted, he
could not sleep, nor did he really wish to. The memory of the
Elder Eddas was too sharp in his mind, and he remained in a
wild, open state all this time. He remembranced frequently. As
the aftershocks of an earthquake unsettle a city, the great
memories trembled inside him and only gradually died away. He
contemplated these memories, trying to find a way to interpret
them to himself. Finally, on the evening of the 90th, he
returned to Bardo's house. The gatekeeper admitted him to the
nightly festivities, even though he had no invitation. After
greeting various guests (Bardo was obviously quite proud of
Danlo's accomplishment and wanted to introduce him to all his
friends), he excused himself. He made his way into the north
wing. There, in a luxurious room smelling of Fravashi carpets,
scent sculptures and freshly
570
cut flowers, he found Hanuman recuperating from his
remembrance.
'Hanu, Hanu,' he said.
Hanuman sat in an immense chair upholstered with seal leather.
He had positioned it directly in front of the blazing
fireplace. He was entirely naked, without even an undergown
covering him. He, too, looked as if he had not slept since the
remembrance. His fine hair was a tangle of greasy blond clumps,
here pressed and matted, and in other places irregularly parted
to reveal his white scalp. When he turned to face Danlo, he
seemed not to see him. His eyes, usually so colourless and
cold, were like pools of pale blue fire. He appeared to be
gazing into himself, through himself into a place of utter
darkness and pain. Danlo thought that he had the haunted,
unhappy look of a man who had been brought back to his youth
once too often. A stranger, meeting him for the first time,
might have guessed he was a thousand years old.
'I'm glad you've come,' Hanuman said.
  Danlo noticed, then, that Hanuman was holding a black
crystal sphere the size of a thallow egg. He cupped it in his
left hand for a moment, then he squeezed it and let it roll
into his other hand. It looked much like a satori stone which
the aficionados of Zanshin use to strengthen their hands.
'Are you well?' Danlo finally asked.
'As you see,' Hanuman said.
 'Have you been able to remove yourself from ... the
memories?' Danlo stood beside Hanuman's chair and pressed his
fingertips against Hanuman's forehead. His skin was oily and
hot; the whole of his body seemed twisted with an intense
inner fire.
  'Perhaps it would be wisest,' Hanuman said, 'if we didn't
talk about the remembrance.'
 'I was afraid ... the kalla had taken you too deep.'
  'Kalla,' Hanuman said. There was bitterness and despair in
the way he spoke the word. Take three sips and be
571

 God. I wonder, of all the things we've been told, could there
be a greater lie?'
'I think kalla is a blessed drug.'
'And perhaps it is – for you.'
 Danlo slowly rubbed his eyes. 'Surya Lal has said that the
kalla nearly poisoned you. That three sips is too much, a
poison for human beings.'
 'Kalla is a window,' Hanuman said. 'Nothing more. It's
looking through the window too long that burns the eyes and
poisons the soul.'
'Everyone is saying you have had a great remembrance.'
  Hanuman was silent for a moment, and then in his secretive
way, he said, 'I've seen what I've seen; I've remembered what
I've remembered.'
 'Have you seen ... the interconnectedness of the ecologies?
Did you understand the rules for embedding, the way each
quark, each cell, each organism, even the gods, building on
each other, the ecologies spreading out across– '
'I've seen too much, Danlo.'
'Truly? Is it possible to see too much?'
'I've seen too clearly.'
 'The One memory,' Danlo said, 'to see it, shimmering, the way
memory is connected to matter, to our minds, to ourselves. I
have spent the last two days trying to see it, to keep the
memory clear.'
 Hanuman smiled quickly, then said, 'I'm glad your remembrance
was so exalted. I've never seen you so happy.'
  'I have never really seen before ... so many possibilities.'
 While Hanuman listened, Danlo talked about evolution and the
possibilities of life within the universe. He spoke of human
beings, of their freedom to grow into godhood, or to remain
gloriously human, to become truly human for the first time. As
Danlo conceived it (a vision shaped by his remembrance of the
Elder Eddas) true humanity was
572
neither a tragedy nor a doom to flee from, but rather, a
marvellous, golden, never-before-realized possibility that each
person might someday create. He spoke for a long time, trying
to elicit some comment or response from Hanuman. But Hanuman
just sat in his leather chair squeezing his black sphere, and
he was as silent and mysterious as a cetic.
 And then he looked straight at Danlo and said, 'No,' he
pronounced this single word with great authority, and then,
like a tortoise pulling back into his shell, he returned to his
silence.
'No? What do you mean?'
  With a great force, Hanuman pushed himself out of his chair.
He paced quickly back and forth across the carpets in front of
the fireplace. The muscles along his pallid thighs quivered
like the strings of a gosharp; his whole body shook with the
tremors of exhaustion. Danlo thought that he might have been
pacing thus for most of two days. Hanuman took no care for his
nakedness, or rather, he flaunted it as if he wanted the world
to view him just as he was. For a moment, he paused in front
of the fireplace and held his arms outspread to warm himself.
The light of the fire licked across his hard shiny body, red
flame tongues against white skin, then he turned and stepped
closer to Danlo. It seemed that he was stepping out of the
fire, like some ancient piece of metalwork come to life. Danlo
could see that he was a changed man, that the blaze of his
remembrance at last must have fused together his will and his
sense of fate. Hanuman's face and his artful body and his
newly forged awareness of himself – everything about him shone
with a terrible beauty. And yet, for all his seeming vitality
and the brilliance of his eyes, there was a darkness about
him, inside him, as if a great part of his soul had cracked
and broken. He smiled at Danlo, sadly, knowingly, and he said,
'No, for the universe, and therefore for human beings, there
is only one possibility.'
He told Danlo a part of his remembrance then. It was
573
 the only time he ever spoke of this experience to anybody. But
his single revelation – his remembrance of the Elder Eddas –
would soon make him famous and would cause Danlo the greatest
of anguish.
 'There is war in heaven,' Hanuman said. He stood close to
Danlo with his arms crossed over his chest. The gods throughout
this galaxy, and in every galaxy, the gods are at war. There
are many gods. So many, even from the alien races. You can't
guess how many. Your father is one, you should know. That is,
he was one – who knows if he's still alive? They're killing
each other. They've been killing each other for a million
years. This is the ecology I've seen: survival of the fiercest
and the vastest. And, of course, Ede the God was not the first,
as the Architects teach. Not nearly the first. You say human
beings can evolve into gods, but that's not enough. It's never
been sufficient. There are three requisites for growth without
bound, and only three: the will to remake oneself; the genius
to survive; and the strength to suffer.'
  He proceeded to expand upon a specific part of his
remembrance: He told Danlo of a great battle that two gods had
fought out near the edge of the Sagittarius Arm of the galaxy.
Beyond the 18th Deva Cluster, where the stars grow thin as a
handful of snow cast into the wind, sixty thousand years
previously, some god of war had destroyed another. The corpse
of this unknown god – Hanuman said it was the size of a small
planet – circled a red giant star. In a low, steady voice, he
divulged the fixed points of this star. This was knowledge only
a pilot could have. It was of a rarefied, purely mathematical
nature, and either Hanuman had learned it from a pilot of the
Order, or he had indeed remembered it as a part of the Elder
Eddas. Since pilots were forbidden to betray such knowledge to
outsiders (and since any pilot fortunate enough to have
discovered a dead god would surely have made his name in
announcing this discovery), Danlo concluded that Hanuman was
telling the truth. Truth was written
574
across Hanuman's tormented face: the truth of a man who has
beheld a force too terrible ever to forget.
 ' "For here is the oldest of teachings",' Hanuman said as he
smiled at Danlo. He rarely quoted from the Book of God any
more; in fact, he did so only in moments of distress. ' "Here
is wisdom: no god is there but God; God is one, and there can
be only one God".'
  He said no more of his remembrance of the Elder Eddas. He
never spoke of the One memory, as others did, nor did he ever
hint that he had been enlightened. But everyone who encountered
him during the days that followed was to comment on the way his
whole being seemed to glow. Danlo, himself, had seen this the
moment he had entered the room. And now he stood face to face
with Hanuman, looking for the source of the light, trying to
understand the change that had come over him. He decided that
'enlightenment' was a poor word for the descent into the
darkest parts of oneself. He thought of Hanuman's great
remembrance as a bedarkening, a kind of negative enlightenment
that had led him only deeper into pride and love of his fate.
He might have described Hanuman, with his burning eyes and
broken soul, as being utterly awakened, but that was not quite
right, either.
He is the opposite of awakened, Danlo suddenly realized.
  In truth, the opposite of awakening is not sleep but rather
the coming into full consciousness of the great 'No'. Danlo
could see that Hanuman was too aware of life's ultimate
negation and was suffering a vast unhappiness behind his smiles
and his silence. He knew then that Hanuman would never have the
strength for such suffering. If he were not healed of his basic
fault, as he fell farther into neverness and the pursuit of
personal godhood, the weakest part of him, like a crack in the
sea ice under a hot sun, would open up and destroy him.
 'In eight more days,' Danlo said, 'we shall be invited to
another joyance.'
'Perhaps,' Hanuman said.
575
 'The kalla is a wild drug, I think,' Danlo said. 'Wild like
the sea. It is always easy to become lost. But you could learn
... to go wherever you will.'
'You're the pilot, not I.'
'But you are a cetic!'
  'A cetic,' Hanuman agreed, and he stared off into the air.
'Cetics are masters of consciousness, yes?'
 Hanuman glanced down at the sphere in his hand. 'Are we?' he
asked.
  'Kalla is a blessed drug. A doorway ... to the deepest
consciousness.'
'You really think so, don't you?'
  'I have seen it. Truly. I have been ... this consciousness.
Only for a moment, and never perfectly – but I have only
tasted the kalla one time.'
 Hanuman stared straight at Danlo, then, and his words poured
out of him like molten rock bubbling from a rent in the earth:
'You've seen it. I shouldn't dispute your vision, should I?
You know what you know. However, I wish you could see, just
one time, what I've seen. But that's an impossibility, I know.
It's silly of me to wish such a thing. You have your blessed
consciousness – never the fear of annihilation, never panic,
never hatred, never pure retching despair.'
 For a while, Danlo stood staring at Hanuman, trying to quell
the despair forming up hard inside his throat. Then he
swallowed and said, 'But, Hanu, to remember yourself, the Elder
Eddas, to become conscious of the One memory – everything is
there, yes? All occurrences, all light, all time, all
possibilities.'
  'You'd like to believe that. But in fact, this
consciousness, this God-memory of yours is like a trap. Think
of it as a lava pool covered with a crust of rock. Step
carelessly, take your three sips of kalla, and then you break
the crust and fall through. And then there's drowning, burning,
annihilation, nothingness.'
 576
 'No, it is just the opposite,' Danlo said. To remember
yourself is to become whole again. To become completely
yourself, your deep self, then there is joy. Just pure joy.'
 'No, memory is pure fire.'
 'No, memory is just– '
  'Danlo, listen to me!' Hanuman's belly quivered as every
muscle in his body seemed to jump and come alive at once. He
seemed intensely alive, Danlo thought. Curiously, for the first
time since they had become friends, he was not coughing. Yet he
was far from being well. He was sick with a strange and
horrible disease that moment by moment was consuming him. He
fairly jumped over to the flower table beside his bed and
reached out his finger. Earlier that day, one of Bardo's
underlings had placed a vase of sunflowers there. Seven
sunflowers pulled ominously at their thin green stems. Each one
was a perfect hemisphere of hundreds of orange-gold petals
exploding outward toward the eye. Hanuman stabbed his finger
into the centre of one of the sunflowers, and he said, 'Look at
these glorious flowers! Do you see what I see? Not the
alienness, not even the beauty, but the burning. They burn my
eyes. I look at them, straining to find the sun in this ugly
little room without windows, and my eyes are on fire. I can see
the leaves, the individual cells, the molecules of chlorophyll
burning for the sun. The memory of the sun – everything
remembers. Do you think the stem cells don't remember being cut
away from the stem this morning? Do you think they don't
convulse at the pain of the knife? Do you think they don't burn
to be rejoined with the main body of the sunflower plant? Yes,
they convulse; yes, they remember; yes, they burn. Everything
burns. The leather in that ugly chair in which I've sat for two
days burns with memory of every hurt and every pain the seal
felt during her life. The air passing my lips as I say these
words: it burns. I breathe, and in each lungful of air, I
inhale a molecule from the dying breath of every animal and
bird that's ever lived on this planet. The remembrancers are
577
right, you should know. The memory of everything is in
everything. And it's all burning, and it never stops. This is
what memory is. This is what I am. And no, I'm not telling you
this because I desire your compassion. That's the last thing
I'd wish of you. But you've always said you wanted to see
things as they are. If that's really true, then open your eyes
and look.'
 Danlo touched the scar above his eye, and he stared at the
sunflowers bursting golden out of their black stone vase. Then
he looked at Hanuman. There stood his best friend, burdened,
unhappy, doomed, trembling with unutterable pain, yet in his
own way, exalted. He had his own burning vision, his own unique
connection with the forces of the universe. He has the look of
a prophet, Danlo thought. Hanuman walked over to the fire and
stood there, wild-eyed and fey, as if he, and he alone, had
been called to accomplish some great task. Upon his sad,
beautiful face was written the conviction that all the forces
of evolution since time's beginning were converging upon him,
that the very future of humanity depended upon his will, his
genius, his strength.
 'Do you remember the day in the Shih Grove?' Danlo asked.
'You said then that the animals and the plants, and people ...
do not feel true pain.'
  'I remember,' Hanuman said. 'I was wrong, and I was right.
Their pain is real. They suffer – everything does. But next to
the pain of the gods, it's nothing.'
'Pain is pain,' Danlo said. 'And you are still a man.'
 'That's mostly true. Do you suppose, however, that the cells
in my brain can't foreknow what it's like to grow without
bound? They know, they remember. Inside my brain, there's a
burning more brilliant than any fire. It's beyond all colour,
beyond even light, and it goes on and on and on.'
'There is a way to make the burning stop,' Danlo said.
'No, Danlo, not in this universe.'
So saying, Hanuman went over near the fireplace where
578
there stood a table. He beckoned Danlo closer, the better to
view the table. It was a low, square, ancient-looking table,
the kind of table one might sit at with a friend in enjoyment
of coffee and conversation. As Danlo could see, the tabletop
was wrought of some translucent substance such as clary or
glass. It was cold and smooth to the touch. It had a dead,
greyish look to it, and Danlo could not imagine why anyone
would wish to make such an ugly thing.
 'The whole universe is on fire,' Hanuman said. He held the
cold, black sphere motionless above the table. 'Haven't you
ever wondered what makes the universe the way it is?'
 Just then, the tabletop came alive with light. Blue dots and
clusters of red, amoeba-like structures flashed beneath the
glass. Danlo realized that these colourful arrays were likely
being generated by liquid crystals inside the table.
'What kind of computer is this?' he asked.
  'Properly, it's not a computer at all,' Hanuman said as he
rolled the black sphere from hand to hand. 'It's just a display
table.'
'And what is it displaying?'
  Hanuman squeezed the black sphere and looked at it for a
while. 'Dolls,' he finally said. 'It's displaying dolls.
Haven't you ever seen the dolls before?'
  'I have heard of... artificial life,' Danlo said. These are
information structures, yes? It is said that computers can
bring information to life.'
 'In a way, information is life,' Hanuman said. 'And the
computer is the universe in which it lives.'
'Which computer?'
'This computer,' Hanuman said.
 Here, he held the black sphere before the firelight, and he
stared at it as if he were an astronomer peering into the very
heart of the universe. He explained that the sphere was a
special kind of computer that the cetics make. It was fifteen
cubic inches of crystalline neurologics of the
579
same kind used in the creation of firestones; as with any good
firestone, it generated an almost infinitely dense information
field. He called it his 'universal computer' and he told Danlo
that it supported entire information ecologies of life.
 'The table will display this life,' he said. 'Shall I show
you a picture of what's occurring inside this computer?'
  The tabletop was now a smooth plane glittering with bits of
light. There were millions of these light bits, which winked on
and off in a blizzard of colours: crimson, sapphire, violet and
green. And magenta, rose, flame red, indigo and aquamarine and
a hundred other colours. Each light bit represented a certain
configuration of information stored inside the universal
computer. The light bits – or rather the information they
represented – were like artificial atoms, each of which was
programmed with unique properties. These fundamental
information structures existed in the cybernetic space that the
cetics call the alam al-mithral. This is the space in which
images are real, the space halfway between the real world and
the Platonic world of ideals. On Old Earth, a thousand years
before the first computers, Avicenna the Wise had posited a
realm of existence midway between matter and spirit. For
millennia, the cetics had applied all their ingenuity to
creating such a realm; it was the claim of the cyber-shamans
that they had succeeded. Many cyber-shamans possessed black
spheres like Hanuman's. Many cyber-shamans had created and
programmed their own unique information atoms in order to
evolve life made of pure information.
 'This is the tenth universe I've designed,' Hanuman said.
'It's the best, most fascinating thing I've ever done, this
creating of universes.'
  In fact, he had not created his universe as a finished
piece, as one might sculpt a block of diamond or weave a
tapestry. Rather, he had created information atoms and rules by
which these atoms interacted with their environment, and with
each other. This was all that he had done.
580
 Other professionals, of course, experimented with artificial
life in different ways. Some ecologists liked to shape their
universes as they evolved, continually adding new programs and
editing out various kinds of informational life. But the
cyber-shamans disdained this personal interference as inelegant
and lacking in profundity. In this tenth universe of Hanuman's,
he had created exactly one hundred and eighty-seven information
configurations and had programmed twenty-three laws specifying
the ways they might combine with each other. He had done this
five hours previously. And then he had let the universal
computer run. As he held the black sphere up to his forehead in
contemplation of what was occurring inside, it was running
still.
  'But why this game?' Danlo asked. 'Why play games ... now?'
'Do you think this is a game?'
  'You are making models of the universe, yes? Models of
different universes ... that might reveal the possibilities of
our own.'
'I already know about Ms universe, Danlo.'
'But evolution– '
'The only evolution that matters any more,' Hanuman said, 'is
that which we might control.'
'Such as the evolution of the dolls?'
  'Of course,' Hanuman said. 'Shall I arrange a display of
their evolution?'
'If you would like.'
 Danlo clasped his hands behind his back as he stared down at
the tabletop. Now the cloud of coloured lights was not quite
so chaotic. In various places beneath the glass, with a
quickness almost impossible to apprehend, points of vermilion
light swirled around green light bits, and tiny aquamarine
light bursts interpenetrated those of crimson. In this way,
the one hundred and eighty-seven colours of light combined to
form thousands of different kinds of information molecules,
and then, thousands of
581
thousands. The glass sparkled with brilliant new patterns of
information almost geometric in their perfection. The patterns
vibrated and organized themselves and rotated against each
other as they combined to make ever more complex patterns; or
they absorbed each other and grew, or sometimes, they
annihilated each other in showers of gold and purple light.
And then other information molecules would feed on this light,
and all this feeding and growing and making of new patterns
happened so quickly that Danlo dared not blink his eyes, lest
he lose sight of the overarching pattern that was beginning to
emerge.
  'Loshisha shona,' Danlo whispered. These lights are
beautiful.'
  The lights were indeed beautiful, beautiful with an evolving
order that emerged from chaos. No one could predict what this
order might be. It was impossible, even in theory, to foreknow
what forms might evolve within the alam al-mithral space of
Hanuman's computer.
 'This program has been running for five hours. The molecules
you see evolved within the first five nanoseconds.'
 'Then the current state of the program is far beyond this,
yes?'
'Far beyond.'
 'How long will you let the program run? What kind of doll ...
are you trying to create?'
 Hanuman tapped his fingernail against his temple. He said,
'I've created nine other universes, but I've never let one run
to its halt state. It's inelegant to seek some sort of solution
to life or some final, perfect form of life.'
  'I understand,' Danlo said. He looked up and nodded, and he
wondered if Hanuman were telling himself the truth.
 'It's the dynamics of artificial life that are beautiful,'
Hanuman said. 'Making the information atoms and the universal
laws so perfectly that everything occurring in the universe is
without flaw or taint of ugliness. I've never been able to
tolerate ugliness.'
582
  Danlo bowed his head, then, and he looked down to see the
information molecules combining into long chains, the chains
knitting themselves into gleaming membranes. After a while,
these membranes had grown and folded into globules that looked
something like organic cells. Only they were not creations of
protein, lipids or RNA; they were only of light, or information
coded into light. Each information cell was a tiny jewel
glittering with ten million points of light. He watched the
cells collect together into a cluster that vibrated with an
astonishing brilliance of colours, and he looked over to see
Hanuman watching, too.
 'What's beautiful,' Danlo said, 'is that a creator can be
astonished by his own creations.'
  For a while, as the evening deepened and the fire burned low
in the fireplace, Hanuman showed Danlo how his creations had
evolved into dolls. To recapitulate five hours of evolution in
a few moments, he speeded up the table display. Danlo watched
as the cells clumped together and exchanged gleaming bits of
information and combined into new forms; he watched the
evolution of simple informational organisms that Hanuman had
jokingly named infosoria. From these jewel-like arrays of
information evolved new kingdoms of artificial life. Hanuman
had classified this life into emerging phyla, and into entirely
new classes and orders that had never existed within any
cybernetic space. The tabletop, a few square feet of brilliant
geometric patterns and flashing glass, could display only the
tiniest fraction of this evolution. Even so, the display was a
riot of colours that exploded outward and radiated into ten
thousand species of artificial life. Many times each second,
species mutated and claded off into new species; sometimes
these species would remain stable for a moment or two and would
fill whole sections of the tabletop with a uniformity of life
that Hanuman called a synusia. But always there was movement
and mutation and information exchange; there were always new
forms and the
583
 violence of broken information arrays. A series of ecological
communities followed one another so quickly that Danlo could
scarcely hold their patterns within his mind. These seres, as
they were called, were ever more complex and ever more
beautiful. The last sere, which had evolved within the
universal computer only an hour earlier, was full of lovely
shapes that seemed made of silver light. In the way they
grouped together and changed direction without warning, they
seemed much like a school of fish. At times, they would nudge
each other as they vied for space; or they would vibrate and
send out waves of information molecules, and when they did
this, they resembled nothing so much as a herd of bellowing,
silvery seals. Hanuman called them dolls, and he said that soon
they would become as intelligent as human beings.
  'As you'll see,' Hanuman said, 'they have a complex social
organization. They build something like cities – you could call
them information arcologies. Most importantly they make
weapons, and they make war. What more ominous sign of
intelligence should we desire?'
 Danlo kept his eyes on the tabletop, and he asked, 'But what
does it mean ... to call these dolls intelligent? They are just
arrays of information ordered by programs. Each information
bit... has no choice in how it interacts with others. Each cell
and cell cluster. And each organism is built up of these
information bits, yes? Each organism, each doll, everything
they do – it is all determined by the programs you made. How
can they have will? Or mind? How can such creatures truly be
alive?'
 'You ask such obvious questions,' Hanuman said. The deeper
question is: How is it that we seem conscious of our will? Why
is it that we seem to be alive?'
 'But, Hanu ... we are alive.'
'Are we really?'
'Yes!'
  'Aren't we made of atoms of matter? Bits of carbon and
oxygen that combine according to universal laws? Aren't
584
these laws programmed into the very fabric of our universe? And
if this is so, if each neuron in your wild, brilliant brain
fires solely according to the laws of chemistry, then why
should you think that you have any will at all?'
  'But our will,' Danlo said, 'our consciousness cannot be
reduced ... to the firing of neurons. And the mind of our cells
cannot be reduced to chemistry. Mind cannot be understood by a
reduction to matter – to the interactions of smaller and
smaller pieces of matter. There is no smallest piece of matter,
I think. If matter is infinitely reducible, then it is not
really reducible at all. Not reducible in any way that could
explain consciousness.'
  Hanuman gazed at the black sphere resting in his hands, and
he asked, 'But what is consciousness, Danlo?'
 Danlo was quiet for a moment, and then he said,
'Consciousness is not anything. Not any thing. Consciousness
... is. It is just what it is, nothing more.'
'But what is matter?'
 High above Danlo, stretched between the angles of the ceiling
and the wall in the room's corner, there was a spider's web, as
large and intricate as any he had ever seen. In the light of
the fire, the web was all shimmering gold, and he wondered how
a simple spider could know how to weave such a glorious thing.
He relived a part of his great remembrance, then. He stared at
the spider's web, and this afterimage of the Elder Eddas burned
inside him: Matter is memory. Matter, he knew, was not bits of
smaller, lifeless bits, but rather the ordered flow of
something he could think of only as mindstuff. Matter is mind,
he remembered, and he told Hanuman this as he stared up at the
lovely web that some unseen spider had made.
 'But what is mind?' Hanuman asked. 'Once again, our argument
is turning in circles.'
  Danlo smiled and said, 'But how should it not? Isn't the
contemplation of consciousness ... like a snake swallowing its
own tail?'
They stood there talking about the cetics' theory of the
585
circular reduction of consciousness. In this reduction, the
human mind is supposedly explainable by neural analysis, and
neural analysis by brain chemistry. And brain chemistry is
reducible to simple chemistry, which in turn, ultimately, can
be reduced to pure quantum mechanics. For millennia, quantum
mechanics has been a precise description of the interactions of
the smallest pieces of observable matter, but it has never been
an explanation of how – and why – these pieces come to be. To
this day, some mechanics continue the attempt to explain matter
in terms of itself, but most have given up this quest as
hopeless. (The mechanics of Neverness, of course, have reduced
all physics to pure mathematics. It is as if they seek to hone
their equations until they are sharp and perfect as swords,
thence to pierce the veils of Platonic space in the hope that
all conceivable particles will spill out into creation like
golden eggs from a sac. In this cosmic conceit, they are closer
to the truth than they could ever know.) It was the cetics, in
the time of Jonath Chu, who proposed the radical notion of
explaining matter in terms of consciousness, rather than
consciousness as an emergent property of the more highly
organized forms of matter. Pure consciousness, according to
Lord Chu, was the very stuff of reality. It underlay all
matter, all energy, all spacetime. It was always moving, yet
always still, as formless and eternal as water yet containing
the possibilities of all things. Lord Chu had invented a
physics of consciousness; he had attempted to explain,
mathematically, how pure consciousness differentiates itself
into all the particles and parts of the universe. Ultimately,
the infamous Chu Wave Theory was proved inadequate and
inconsistent, but Jonath Chu had almost succeeded in closing
the circle of the reduction of human consciousness to the pure,
universal consciousness that is only itself, and nothing more.
 'I think you have your own theory of consciousness,' Danlo
said.
'Every cetic has a theory.'
586
 'Yes, but I have heard that you made improvements on the Wave
Theory ... as a part of your masterwork.'
'Who told you this?'
 Danlo shrugged his shoulders and said, 'I have many friends,
Hanu. They cannot help talking about what you have done.'
  'What have I done?' Hanuman wondered aloud. He began pacing
back and forth. 'I've simply abandoned this notion of
consciousness. What can we say about pure consciousness? It's
not this, it's not that, it stirs, it stirs not, it's
undefinable, unmeasurable, paradoxical. In a sense, it can't be
said even to exist.'
'But you exist. We exist. We know ... that we exist.'
'Perhaps.'
 'In the Elder Eddas, it is all there, the One Memory ...
which is identical in each of us. The way consciousness
becomes– '
 'I've had a different remembrance of the Elder Eddas, you
should know.'
  'But at the deepest level, where all differences disappear,
where memory is universal– '
'We each create our own universe, Danlo.'
  Danlo touched the feather in his hair, then looked at the
black sphere that Hanuman was holding. 'I think you love your
own universe too well.'
  'Should I love this world any better? This tangibility of
stone and substance rushing to destruction? All the ugliness of
a world that rots or decays or falls apart? No, I can't love
it. There's so much pain. Even wickedness. You've seen the
hibakusha children – the way they live. The way they die. You
say that pain is the awareness of life. But, no, pain mocks
life. Life, in this ugly flesh we're trapped in: it's all
affliction and torment. A burning without end. And what is it
that burns? Do we burn? What are we, really? We're pure flame,
and flame burns, it's true, but it doesn't burn itself. There's
a flame inside my flesh – call it pattern or program or soul,
it doesn't matter. I am
587
 not matter. I can't tell you how I loathe any connection to
this flawed, pinkish material that never stops burning,' here,
he paused to grasp the skin on the back of his beautifully made
hand, and then he shook it so violently that his knuckle bones
fairly rattled. 'How should I love these common elements of
blood and bone that keep my true self imprisoned? You say that
matter is mind, but no, matter is misery. Matter is all
mutability and disintegration. So long as we're bound to
matter, we fall into decay atom by atom, or fall quickly to
disease, but we all finally fall. And then there's only death
and annihilation. Extinction. The memory of every fine feeling
we've ever had or friends whom we've loved – all erased. Which
is why I must find a way to free the fire from the flesh. It's
only human to desire escape. We all desire this. Let's never
forget that you've had your blessed remembrance.'
 After Hanuman had finished this little speech, Danlo bowed
his head in remembrance of the disease that had swept all the
Devaki tribe into death. He touched the lightning scar above
his eye, then said, Truly, everyone wants to escape suffering.
But, Hanu, your world of dolls, this new passion of yours ...
this is an escape from material reality. Remembrancing is
escaping into material reality.'
'I don't see the difference.'
 'But, there is all the difference in the world. It is the
difference between what is real ... and what is not.'
 Hanuman's face fell cold and he asked, rhetorically, 'Should
a cetic listen to a pilot circumscribe the nature of reality?'
 'That was not my intention,' Danlo said. He tapped the glass
tabletop glowing with the light of Hanuman's dolls. 'I only
wanted to distinguish between real life ... and a simulation of
life.'
 'I see. A pilot wishes to make this distinction.'
 'Life cannot be made ... from bits of information.'
 'No, that's precisely wrong,' Hanuman said. 'Information
 588
is the most real thing there is. The essence of everything is
pure information.'
  Like a Zanshin master preparing to defend the space nearby
him, Hanuman placed his feet precisely on the wooden floor
tiles. He seemed preternaturally relaxed, yet wary. He stood in
the orange glow of the dying fire. He told Danlo something of
his contribution to the cetics' theory of the circular
reduction of consciousness. He admitted that he knew nothing of
consciousness but nearly everything about mind. All mind, he
said (and all matter, too), could be seen as a precise ordering
of information. This was especially true of life, of the
logical form that underlay all life. He claimed that the
logical form of any living thing could be separated from the
elements of material reality. Aliveness, he said, our sense of
selfness and existence as minded beings resided only in this
logical form and not in matter. Our minds were nothing but pure
and elegant patterns that could be encoded as programs, thence
to be preserved in the cybernetic spaces of a computer.
Hanuman's sudden reversion to the philosophy of cybernetic
gnosticism – the belief that matter was evil and that I mind or
soul could be redeemed from flesh and saved forever in some
cybernetic paradise – bewildered and disturbed Danlo. From the
moment they had set out for Bardo's party, he'd thought that he
had understood a part of Hanuman's attraction to Ringism: it
was pure heresy against the fundamental doctrines of the
Cybernetic Universal Church. Hanuman loved playing the heretic
as he loved playing chess. It was his delight to mock the
sanctimonies of the church into which he had been born. He had
hated everything about Edeism, especially the easy machine
ecstasies that were an Architect's reward for cleansing
negative programs from one's brain. He had hated this corrupt
old religion, and so it was his intention to play the prophet
of one that was new. And so he stood there clutching a
precisely machined ball of neurologics between his hands, and
he seemed hollow-eyed and
589
haunted by his own words. Danlo wondered if Hanuman truly
believed that mind could be encoded as a computer program. He
did not want to think that Hanuman might be as insincere as a
wormrunner selling a dead firestone. As they faced each other
in front of the room's darkening fireplace and he listened to
Hanuman talk about dolls and the perfecting of all life, he was
dazzled by the darkness of Hanuman's words. He could see only
the faintest shadow of what would be obvious to historians a
thousand years hence: that Hanuman's genius, as man and cetic,
would be to infuse Ringism with cybernetic gnosticism and the
ecstatic use of the computer, thus causing an explosive and
universal religion to be born.
 While staring at the beautiful dolls that Hanuman had made,
Danlo ran his finger along the feather in his hair. Except for
the zippering sound of his fingernail against the feather's
barbs, the room was very quiet. At last, he stepped nearer to
Hanuman and told him, 'You have fallen crueller, the older you
have become. Cruel toward yourself.'
 'Perhaps,' Hanuman said. 'Although it's cruel of you to
remind me, if this is so.'
  'I am ... sorry,' Danlo said. He bowed his head, ashamed at
having spoken too freely.
 'If I'm cruel, I'm no crueller than this ugly world I was
born into.'
'The world is the world. The universe– '
 'The universe is running to ruin,' Hanuman said. 'If you wish
to envision the future of the universe, think of the Vild. A
thousand light-years of ruined stars and dead planets. Dust,
decay. Think of this when you look out the window at night.'
  Danlo pressed his fingers to his forehead, then said, 'But,
Hanu, haven't you ever stood on the ocean just before the
moons come up? When the world is all ice and starlight? Why is
everything so beautiful?'
  'Is it? How many times have I heard you decry this world as
shaida?'
 590
 'It is true, the world is full of shaida.'
 'Then why seek so blindly to affirm it?'
  'You think I am blind ... to the world?'
 'Your aspiration of becoming an asarya – this is a blind
man's quest.'
  'But there must be a way to go beyond shaida. To live, even
if the living is lethal.'
 'Live?' Hanuman cried out, and he pointed at the scar above
Danlo's eye. He thumped his chest with both hands, then held
his palms upward in exasperation. 'Do you call this living?'
'This is the only life we will ever have.'
'A blind man's philosophy.'
 'This is the only life we could ever have,' Danlo said. 'Of
all the trillions of times the universe has called living
things into life, you could have been born ... only when you
were born.'
'But why should anyone have to be born at all?'
  'I do not know,' Danlo said. 'But despite the shaida, there
is something marvellous in the way the universe– '
 'No, our universe is flawed,' Hanuman said. He rubbed his red
eyes. 'Horribly and irredeemably flawed. Everywhere we look:
disease, delusion, despair. Everywhere, all the elements of
this creation, the immutable laws of nature. Who created these
elements? Who wrote these laws? God? It's silly to believe in
God, even sillier to ignore his handiwork. If there was ever a
God, he must have been drunk when he created this abomination.
No, I'm being too kind. Let's look at the universe just as it
is. What is this infinite stellar machine that grinds us until
we bleed and die? It's nothing more than a computer made of
common matter, programmed by universal laws. The universe is
computing the consequences of these laws. Why? So that we might
live in marvel? No. No, no, no. The universe was programmed to
arrive at the answer to some great question. The Programmer
must have his question answered. What question, you wonder?
It's a silly
591
question, really, a cruel question better asked by a
mathematician or a merchant: how much? That is the only
question the universe asks, and every time a child dies of
radiation burns or a man grows so old and feeble-brained he
forgets his wife's name, her very face, the nearer the universe
to an answer. How much, Danlo? How much suffering and ugliness
can a man behold before he falls mad? Before he falls upon the
crowds outside the Hofgarten with foaming teeth or lasers or
knives? How much insanity can a civilization hold before it
blows up the stars? God wants to know. Make no mistake, God is
completely cruel, and this universe he's created is hell. God
wants to know how much hell we can bear, because the hellfire
that consumes him is infinite and unbearable, and it never
stops. God tortures the creatures of his hand in the hope we'll
join him in suffering, and thus ease the loneliness of his
pain.'
  At these words, Danlo rubbed his eyes and walked over to the
sunflowers. He studied them a while, then looked at Hanuman and
said, 'And so you sit alone in this room and play with dolls?
Why, Hanu?'
   Hanuman was still holding his black sphere, and he turned it
around and around between his hands. He said, 'If I could
build a computer large enough, if I could write programs with
enough subtlety and elegance, then I believe it would be
possible to evolve a perfect metalife. A life without war,
without death, without bitterness, suffering, or even pain.'
'Truly? You believe this is truly possible?'
Hanuman smiled, then said, softly, 'It must be.'
   He spoke with such sincerity and rare openness that Danlo
could not bear looking at him. Danlo's head was beginning to
ache, and his eyes burned, and he could not bear to meet the
look of terrible hope on Hanuman's face. And so he stared off
at the logs glowing red in the fireplace. After a long while he
said, 'But what about you?'
'You mustn't concern yourself.'
'Even if you achieve ... what you wish to achieve, what
592
about yourself? The fire, the light, inside – it will still be
there, yes?'
 'Perhaps.'
 'But, Hanu, there is a way to make the burning stop.'
'No, you don't understand.'
'In the remembrances– '
'No, no.'
  'The blessed kalla ... it is like an ocean that will quench
all burning.'
'Oh, Danlo – no, no, no, no.'
'The One memory – we have only begun to see it.'
'In so many ways, you're still so blind.'
   There was bitterness in the way that Hanuman said this, and
something more, and Danlo felt as if a serpent had spat venom
into his eyes. His eyes began to sting and water and he threw
his hand across his forehead. That may be so,' he said. 'But a
friend would not say that to his friend, not in that way.'
'A friend wouldn't push his friend into the ocean, either.'
'Not even if he were mad with fire?'
   Hanuman's head snapped toward Danlo, and he said, 'We always
argue in circles, don't we? Leave me alone now. Go back to
your whore. Go drink your kalla and swim in your oneness and
your memories – I don't care.'
   Never, since the day they had almost killed each other in
the hot pool of Perilous Hall, had there been such ill will
between them. Danlo stared at Hanuman, and all he could think
to say was: 'Will you attend any more joyances?'
  In silence, Hanuman returned his stare, as if to reply: Will
you?
'You have no interest in the Way, then?' Danlo asked.
 He thought that Hanuman would not answer this question,
either, but after a few moments of contemplation, he said, 'Oh,
no, I've complete interest in the Way of Ringess. Sometime we
might discuss this. But not now. Please leave me alone – I
can't talk any more.'
593
  After a long, awkward silence, Danlo said goodbye. He
watched as Hanuman went over to the fireplace and heaped three
new logs onto the grate. In moments the fire was blazing again,
red-orange flames fairly leaping out into the room. Hanuman
stood close to the fire. He turned away from Danlo, turned
toward the glittering black sphere that he still held in his
hands. Danlo left him there, standing completely naked,
completely absorbed in staring into the flames reflected in the
surface of his universal computer. Danlo left him alone with
his dolls, and he was too full of grief to foresee that they
both would become deeply involved with the Way of Ringess, and
soon.
594



CHAPTER TWENTY

A Conversation

Who, having eyes, can see the unseeable? Who, having hands, can
touch the untouchable? Who, having ears, can hear the
unhearable? Who, having lips, can say what cannot be said?
 – from the Meditations of Jin Zenimura

 It is an historic truth that new religions always grow in ways
that their founders do not foresee. Religions, to survive, must
make accommodations with the larger political and ecological
structures that nurture them; they must organize themselves
around a body of doctrine, law and ritual, an immortal and
sanctified body that its adherents may not violate with their
personal revelations of the infinite; above all else, cults
that would become universal religions must control and channel
humanity's spiritual energies, for if they do not, they will
make deadly enemies of world-emperors, lords, and the
architects of other religions – either that, or passion will
consume them from within. This control is always a delicate
matter, and it always, ultimately, fails. Most cults let the
godfire flow too freely and so burn themselves out in a few
years; like supernovae, they shine brilliantly even as they
explode apart into a confusion of disillusionments, ecstatic
visions, megalomanias and ruined lives. Some cults, from their
very beginning, damp the most natural and numinous of human
passions; they substitute theories of the universe for the
experience of God, and thus become philosophies or sciences
rather than true religions. Only rarely do religions
595
 such as Edeism arise and flourish and infect the swarms of
humanity with their faith. But it is the fate of all religions,
as of all things, to grow old. Doctrines meant to guide
individuals to the deepest truths of the universe become wails
of words separating society from society, men from women, and
cutting people off from the holiest part of themselves. Vision
becomes degraded into creed; faith degenerates into belief;
zeal and piety replace ecstasy and the mystic union with the
godhead. In time, the heart of each religion grows hard and
dies. And so seekers of the godly will always turn to new
prophets and new ways, never realizing that, ultimately, all
religions separate man from God.
 Danlo, of course, in his quest to discover why the universe
had fallen into shaida, had long been aware of religion's
essential irony. But until his involvement with the religion of
Ringism, as it came to be called, he had always played at
religiousness; he had moved from church to church and ritual to
ritual as easily as his skates could carry him throughout the
different quarters of the City. Never had any doctrine or
reading of canon law prevented him from beholding a religion's
pure and numinous core. And then, one night in early winter,
while the first of the season's snows caught Neverness in a
cloud of fractured crystals and whiteness, he attended a second
party at Bardo's house. He went alone. Hanuman remained in
Bardo's guest room, sequestered and still recuperating from his
great remembrance (and still playing with his dolls), while
Tamara Ten Ashtoreth, who loved Bardo's joyances almost as much
as she loved love play, had a prior engagement that evening.
And so once again, Danlo entered the music room and listened to
rare musics and smelled ancient smells, but this time he found
himself cut off from the deepest experience of the Elder Eddas.
The drug called kalla had been his window to great remembrance,
and he had vowed to take three sips of it again upon his next
journey into himself. But when he stood in
596
the circle of seekers and awaited the passing of the blue bowl,
he was forbidden to drink from it freely.
  'We've had to make changes in our ceremony,' Bardo told
everyone. He stood inside the circle with Thomas Rane, who bore
the bowl of kalla as if it were a great weight in his hands.
Bardo nodded at him, then looked directly at Danlo. He said,
'As my cousin, Surya Lal, has observed, kalla is too potent a
drug to swig down like beer. Therefore, we've made changes.'
  He held in his hand a small silver jigger, similar to the
kind bartenders use to measure liquid toalache into their
patrons' cups. Similar but not the same: he had ordered it made
in a jewellery shop on the Street of Diamonds. It was an ornate
piece of work. Constellations of tiny white diamonds encrusted
its surface, while inside, thin golden bands demarcated the
various levels to which it might be filled. Counting the
topmost band, which ran in a golden circle around the jigger's
rim, there were three levels. While Thomas Rane held the bowl
of kalla steady, Bardo dipped the jigger into the clear liquid,
and he was careful to fill it only two thirds full.
 'This is an exact measure of what two sips should be,' he
said. Take two sips, and see God.'
  He approached Surya Lal, and she knelt before him and opened
her little mouth as if she were a bird. He poured the kalla
onto her tongue. She swallowed in a quick convulsion of jaw and
throat, and honoured him with a head bow. And then he moved on
to the next seeker of remembrance and administered a second
jigger of the holy liquid, and so on, one by one to all the
kneeling people around the circle.
'Journey far and journey deep,' Bardo said.
  And once again Danlo remembranced the Elder Eddas, farther
and deeper than almost anyone else, but not as deeply as he
would have liked. Although he was the pride and wonder of
Bardo's circle, his growing fame meant little to him. He was a
young journeyman, full of wild dreams
597
 and wilfulness, and he had a journeyman's hatred of kneeling
before others.
 'The changes you have made in the ceremony are unseemly,' he
said to Bardo a few nights later. He had arranged to meet with
Bardo in his observatory atop his house's centremost tower. The
room was little more than a circular stone floor encased in a
clary dome. It was a cold room, but it was quiet and private,
and on clear evenings, it afforded a fine view of the lights of
the Old City. 'Kalla is a blessed drug,' Danlo said. 'We should
not have to go begging on our knees for a couple of sips of
it.'
 He argued that all men and women should be able to partake of
kalla according to their need and inspiration, a sentiment
which was felt by quite a few of Bardo's followers. This
sentiment flowed like a dark undercurrent at each of the
joyances. Ringists of all backgrounds resented having to wait
ten days between tastes of kalla; the most radical formed a
clique, or fellowship, to trade stories of their remembrances
and to persuade Bardo to place an urn of kalla in his front
hallway so that anyone entering his house could dip their hands
and lips into it. They disdained the patronage of memory
guides, even that of master remembrancers such as Thomas Rane.
They believed that each individual must approach the great
memories individually, without help, guidelines or interference
from others. To control the journey into the self, they
believed, was to inhibit discovery; it was like setting out
across the snowdrifts and crevasses of the moonlit sea ice with
one's legs tied together, or like standing beneath the night's
strange new stars with a veil of others' suggestions thrown
over one's eyes. Only those with the courage to plunge alone
into the unknown, it was said, could ever hope to remember
themselves. Only those with the self-taught insight and skill
to navigate the roaring universe inside them would ever truly
behold the Elder Eddas.
598
 'Even supposing I agreed with you, as one man talking to
another, there are other considerations,' Bardo admitted to
Danlo. 'As the owner of this house, and, ah, as initiator of
these joyances, I have responsibilities. By God, you can't
imagine the responsibilities! Do you have any idea how much
food my four hundred guests eat each night? How much wine and
toalache they suck down? Ah, Bardo is a rich man, you say, but
have you ever counted the cost of smuggling kalla into the
city? Yes, smuggling, I said. Don't looked so surprised, Little
Fellow – where did you suppose your "blessed drug" comes from?
We can't just squeeze it like bloodfruit juice into a cup, you
know.'
  'I had thought ... that the remembrancers make the kalla,'
Danlo said.
 Without warning, Bardo smacked his fist into his open hand.
The sound of flesh against flesh was overloud and echoed about
the room. 'Well, it's true, they do make it – on Simoom. You're
aware that the remembrancers were once a branch of the cetics,
before both disciplines merged with the Order? And did you know
the cetics established themselves on Simoom largely because
plants grow there unlike any others in the known universe? No?
Well, the remembrancers have maintained their druggery there,
all these millennia. Each year they ship a small quantity of
kalla to the remembrancers throughout the Civilized Worlds. And
to Neverness. And all of it goes straight to the remembrancer's
tower. Of course, when Thomas Rane and his students agreed to
help me with the joyances, they brought their personal stocks
of kalla with them. But that lasted less than a tenday, too
bad. Fortunately, I'd had the foresight to woo a master on
Simoom – the master pharmacologist for all the remembrancers.
He loves money more than his devotion to his vows. You might
say I suborned him – I've had to pay enormous bribes, just so I
could load a few barrels of kalla into one of my deepships. And
that, Little Fellow, is the source of your goddamned drug.'
599
  'But why can't you synthesize the kalla, here, in the City?'
 Bardo's face fell sad, like a clown's, and he said, 'Some
secrets the remembrancers keep very well, even from
themselves. Even that treacherous pharmacologist has some
scruples. I can't find anyone who knows how to make the kalla,
too bad. Not even Thomas Rane knows, and he knows almost
everything. Then, too, of course, it's a violation of the
covenants for anyone to synthesize chemicals inside the City.'
  'If all this is true,' Danlo said, 'then should you be
telling me these things?'
 'Why not? Are you a spy for the Lord Cetic and his
underlings?'
  'No,' Danlo said. He touched the sleeve of his kamelaika; he
ran his fingertips back and forth over the tight black wool,
and he remembered that Bardo had once worn a similar garment.
'No, I am not a spy, but I am still a journeyman pilot ... of
the Order.'
'Yes, the Order. Well, God damn the Order.'
 Danlo stood with his forehead just beneath the dome, where
waves of cold air rippled and touched his breath into steam. He
peered out at the City, eastward, in the direction of the
Academy. But the curving clary panes were dusted with fresh new
snow, and he could see almost nothing. 'I felt as you did,
once,' Danlo said. 'Do you remember? But you persuaded me to
remain in the Order.'
'I did? Ah, I did, too bad.'
  'I am not sorry ... that I have become a pilot,' Danlo said.
The dreamtime, the number storm, the stars – I have learned so
much.'
 Bardo rocked back and forth on his slippered feet, and he let
loose a long, deep sigh. 'Ahhh, but you could learn more in my
music room than you'll ever find out in the galaxy's
wastelands. I should know. You've a talent for remembrancing,
anyone can see that. Why do you think I've issued you an open
invitation to my parties?'
 600
  'I had thought it was because ... we were friends.'
 'By God, we are friends! Though I admit I must be two-thirds
a madman for making friends with another Ringess.'
  'Is it a condition of our friendship that I keep secret...
the secrets of your house?'
 'And what if it were?'
 Bardo stood staring at Danlo, and his eyes were dark pools
full of sadness, belligerence, and devotion. Danlo stared back
at him a long time before saying, 'Then I would keep your
secrets.'
'You would?'
  'Yes,' Danlo said. He nodded his head slowly as a memory
suddenly came to him: An Alaloi man, upon pain of death, may
not reveal to any uninitiated male (or woman) the secrets of
the Song of Life. Full men, he knew, could be silent as the sky
when needful. He held his eyes steady, and he said, 'I would
rather die than tell anyone your secrets.'
  'You would? Well, you're too damn noble – I've said that
before. In truth, we've nothing to conceal. It's been obvious
where we must be getting our kalla from. I expect the Lord
Remembrancer, if not the Lord Cetic, will soon expose our
pharmacologist and debase him. Just as well we've stockpiled
enough kalla to last a couple of years – unless you and your
friends go after it like dogs lapping up puddle water.'
 Danlo smiled at him and said, Take three sips of kalla and be
God.'
  'You should be thankful you're allowed any kalla at all.
That may not last.'
'What do you mean?' Danlo quickly asked.
  'I mean, the Lords of the Order can keep young journeymen –
or anyone else – from dabbling with forbidden drugs.'
  'Forbid the use of kalla?' Danlo half-shouted. 'But how
could they do that? If they forbade it, there would be war, I
think.'
601
  Of all the horrors of civilization, Danlo thought it most
horrible the way civilized people sought always to control the
bodies and minds of others. This age-old struggle for control
had led to untold bloody wars. He had studied enough history
to know of the drug wars fought on Old Earth, and on many of
the Civilized Worlds. Billions of people had died in these
wars. He had thought that human beings long ago, a millennium
before the Swarming's second wave began, had established the
right to alter their consciousnesses at will. Danlo, himself,
had always regarded this as a fundamental and inalienable
human right, but now Bardo hinted that this was not so.
  'Ah, war,' Bardo said as he looked out the window. 'Some
wars will have to be fought again and again, till the last
woman gives birth to the last poor babe.'
'Even the drug wars?'
 'Listen, Little Fellow, anyone with enough power can make
anything unlawful. Or worse – unobtainable.'
 'But forbidding the drinking of kalla ... that would violate
the covenants,' Danlo said.
  'So? Do you think the covenants have never been suspended
before?'
'I know ... that they have.'
  'In truth,' Bardo said, 'the lords needn't forbid kalla to
keep people from the Way. They've only to discourage anyone of
the Order to associate with myself, or to enter my house. Or
they can deny immigration to seekers of the Eddas – keep them
from ever entering the City. Or they can spread rumours that
kalla poisons the brain cells. Or – I admit this is utter
paranoia – they could secretly release poisoned kalla to the
populace to discourage the drinking of it. Or, if we force them
to extremes, they could even hire warrior-poets to assassinate
our leaders.'
  'And therefore you would appease the Lords of the Order?'
  'Appease them! By God, I'd like to forget them, if I could,
the whole rotting Order. But I can't, too bad.'
602
  Danlo brushed the long hair away from his eyes and said,
'But mightn't it be possible ... to help the lords remembrance
the Elder Eddas?'
  'To suborn the whole Order, eh?' Bardo laughed out. 'Well,
I'd suborn the whole damn universe, if I could. The Elder Eddas
are the key to everything, these goddamned memories. The
memories of the future that a few of us have seen, a new way of
living for our bloody kind. Ah, listen to me, I'm my own best
propagandist! But the truth is the truth. The Way of Ringess is
not just some cult designed to bring Bardo women, money and
power, I promise you. Not just. It's the way, or, I should say,
lest I appear a fanatic, it's the best damn way that humankind
has ever found to fulfil its destiny.'
 'And you believe ... that our destiny is to be as gods?
Truly?'
  'Do I believe it!' Bardo roared out. 'I've seen it, with my
own eyes, your father, who became a goddamned god even as I
watched.'
 The universe is a womb for the genesis of gods, Danlo
remembered. He looked deep into Bardo's eyes, then said, Take
three sips of kalla and– '
  'Your father,' Bardo interrupted, 'remembranced the Eddas
more clearly than anyone, and he never in his life tasted
kalla.'
  'I have often wondered ... what my father remembered. What
he saw.'
 Bardo clasped his hands behind his back and he began
strolling around the room. His steps were heavy and ponderous;
he dragged his feet across the floor, obviously not caring
that the rough stones were shredding his pretty silk slippers.
'Well, if he descryed the future, as I believe he did, he
would have seen that kalla is a dangerous drug.'
'I think it is a blessed drug.'
 'Our enemies,' Bardo said, 'are already questioning how any
drug could induce such an exalted experience as the
remembrance of the Elder Eddas.'
603
'But why should they doubt this?'
 'Well, it's the old problem of chemicals and consciousness.
Ah, matter and spirit. Everyone knows deep remembrance to be a
spiritual experience. It's a mystery how the juice of a few
goddamned plants could bring anyone closer to God.'
 Danlo smiled at this and said, 'But there is no mystery,
Bardo. A harpist plucks the strings of her gosharp and plays
the rhapsodies of Ayondela. A simple gosharp, this instrument
made of kasja wire and shatterwood ... makes the sweetest
music. A man takes three sips of kalla, and he touches off the
release of neurotransmitters, acetylcholine and tryptamine and
serotonin. Is the music of the mind any less sweet for being
made with ... these blessed molecules?'
  'Has Thomas Rane taught you the chemistry of this drug? Then
you'll know how dangerous it really is.'
 'But danger,' Danlo said, 'is just the left hand of
exaltation.'
 'There speaks Danlo the Wild,' Bardo said, and he sighed.
'You've had your three sips of kalla and your exaltation.
Others have had, ah, other experiences.'
'Do you mean Hanuman?'
'For a while, Little Fellow, I was afraid he'd fallen mad.'
'And you?'
 Bardo puffed out his cheeks, then said, 'Did you think I'm
too much a coward to have taken three sips? Well, I've done
exactly that. On six different nights. And each one was a
journey into heaven and hell, a sort of divine madness. I
remembered myself, I think, but I wasn't really myself, I was
my memories, or became them, in a hellish sort of way, but more
than that, I ... ah, damn it, Little Fellow! Who can talk about
these things?'
  Danlo looked at Bardo and smiled. 'But if we do not talk
about the Elder Eddas, who will?'
'No doubt sceptics who've never remembranced them
604
 will blather on and on, explicating in detail our drugged
delusions.'
'We will have to tell people the truth, then.'
'And how do we do that?'
'By using the truest words we can find,' Danlo said.
'What words?'
  'These words,' Danlo said. He closed his eyes and let his
fingers touch the feather in his hair. 'We should say that the
stars and rocks and dreams of men and women ... the memory of
all and everything is contained in the Elder Eddas. The Eddas
are full as a cup overflowing with water, yet empty like the
void, infinitely empty, more empty than the nothingness out
beyond the Southern Wall of galaxies. There will always be ...
a space for more memory. These things we have seen: that memory
is always being created and always destroyed, and that it is
eternal, too, preserved like pearls floating in an urn of
blacking oil. And everything is memory, yes? The universe is
like an ocean roaring with memory. I am the Elder Eddas, and
that is my truth, and you are, too, and that is your truth, and
people forget this almost the moment they see it as it is. It
is hard to remembrance the Eddas. The deepest part. It shines
through everything, the light that blinds. It is like a dance
of starlight, an endless photon stream, always moving, always
beautiful, impossible to really see. And the colours,
shimmering, dissolving into each other, the infinite points of
silver and violet and living gold – all the colours, and no
colours that I have ever seen before, or imagined seeing. And
behind the colours and the motion, there is a total stillness,
a silence more real than rocks or wind or the ice of the sea.
It is just pure memory. I am that silence, truly, and nothing
else. As you are, and everything is.'
  Danlo ceased speaking, and he stepped over to the western
quadrant of the room. There, in front of him, the dome was free
of snow; through this transparent section of clary he saw the
hotel district lit up with rows of cold flame globes, thousands
of distinct points sparkling in their
605
 colours among the millions of lights of the City. He pressed
his forehead against the dome, and the clary was so cold it
hurt his skin. For a long while, he stood there motionless,
looking out at the lovely, quiet lights.
'Danlo?'
'Yes?'
 Bardo came over to him and laid his hand across his shoulder.
With much mmming and ahhhing, he cleared his throat. When he
finally spoke, his voice was almost a whisper. 'What you've
just said – would you really tell people that?'
'Yes, why not?'
 'Well, your words, pretty as they are, contradict each other.
You say the Eddas are empty and full, silent and roaring like
the goddamned sea, all at the same time. Motionless yet always
moving – aren't you afraid people will laugh at you?'
  Danlo smiled and said, 'I would not want to keep anyone from
laughing ... if that is what he wants to do.'
  'But can't we just say that this, ah, experience of the
Eddas is beyond words? Shouldn't we just admit that it's
ineffable and be done with it?'
'But it is not ineffable,' Danlo said.
'Well, I think it is, Little Fellow.'
  'You have had your three sips of kalla,' Danlo said. 'Does
my account of my journey strike you as being untrue?'
  Bardo's face filled with blood then, and it was hard to tell
whether he was angry, embarrassed or frustrated. 'No, not
untrue,' he said. 'But, worse: absurd. We can't go around
proclaiming that the deepest experience a man or woman can have
is paradoxical.'
  'But the deepest parts of the Elder Eddas are paradoxical,'
Danlo said.
'But we can't say that, can we?'
'We can say ... whatever we have to say.'
 'But what about logic, then?' Bardo roared out. 'We live in a
world of goddamned logic, don't we?'
606
'Yes, of course ... that is true.'
 'Well? Would you throw away the rules of logic like a madman
casting pearls down a multrum?' Danlo smiled at this earthy
image, and he said, 'The world, as we normally see it – as we
speak of it – it is all multiple, yes? All the buildings of the
City, the individual people, their possessions and plans,
everything they do – every thing or act must be distinguishable
from all others. What is logic, if not the rules keeping all
objects and events distinct? A bird is a bird, we think, and
thus it cannot be a man. A man either exists ... or he does not
exist, but not both, simultaneously. And we exclude any middle
possibility, and we live by this law. And rightly so. If we did
not, we could never properly speak of things, or say that one
event causes another. Or even that there occurred separate
events. The blessed laws of logic ... define what we mean by
multiplicity.'
  Bardo, who had devoted half his lifetime to the study of
mathematics and logic, suddenly belched, releasing vapours of
garlic and goatroot into the air. He belched once more and
said, 'I've never thought about the matter in quite that way
before. I suppose you're about to conclude that logic cannot be
applied to the experience of the Eddas because of the, ah,
unity of memory?'
 Danlo nodded his head and smiled. The words I have spoken...
I have tried to consider them, to polish them like a mirror. I
believe they reflect the experience of remembrance truly, as
much as words can reflect any experience. But remembrance
itself is beyond logic. In the deepest part of the Eddas, there
are no distinctions between things. In the way the universe
remembers them. The memory of all things is in all things – the
remembrancers say this. I have seen ... that this is true.
There is a oneness of all memory, yes? A blessed oneness.'
 'And so you intend to skate up and down the streets blithely
speaking in paradoxes about this – ah, I can
607
scarcely force my lips to make these goddamned mystical words
– this oneness?'
   'As you have said,' Danlo reminded him, 'the truth is the
truth.'
   'And if you go telling it everywhere, we'll have every
hibakusha and seeker in the City knocking at my doors for an
invitation to a joyance.'
'But ... isn't that what you want?'
   'Ah, is that indeed what Bardo wants?' Bardo asked himself
as he glanced down at the floor. The huge man's lips cracked
with the beginning of a smile, and Danlo immediately knew that
Bardo, all along, had been plotting the radical expansion of
Ringism. Danlo smiled too, and then they were smiling at each
other in sudden understanding.
 'Of course,' Bardo said, 'even true words can only draw
people to the Way. We'll still have to show them the truth.'
 'It would be better ... if they showed themselves.'
 'Take two sips of kalla and see God, ' Bardo said. 'We'll
have to teach the people how to see.'
'No, Bardo. One teaches oneself to see.'
 'Well, we have to control these goddamned remembrances, don't
we?'
   'If you control it ... then you will destroy it, the great
memory.'
'I'm sorry, we've no choice but to ration the kalla.'
'Let the people drink the kalla as they will.'
'No, it's too dangerous.'
   'Living is dangerous, too,' Danlo said. 'Would you ration
out and control the moments of your life?'
'Again, there speaks Danlo the Wild.'
   Danlo ran his finger along the hard, cold scar above his eye
and said, 'All of us, every time we drink the kalla, we are
all plunged into the same blessed sea. Some will swim where
others drown.'
'And if you continue gulping kalla as if it were water,' Bardo
said, 'eventually you'll drown, too. Even you.'
'That is possible.'
608
   'Well, I can't allow you to go plunging yourself into
madness, can I?'
  We are all food for God, Danlo remembered. Somewhere inside
his ears the Elder Eddas roared, and he knew that this great
memory might someday consume him; it might digest the tissues
of his soul so totally there would be neither escape nor
recrystallization into that image he knew as himself. But that
moment, he thought, if it ever came, lay far in the future. Now
was the time for boldness and journeys into the dark currents
of the self. It was his faith that will and wisdom would always
guide him back to the world of living things.
 'But, Bardo, when I spoke of drowning ... this was only a
metaphor. It is always possible to lose yourself in the sea of
memory. But then, there will always be another journey, yes?'
  'Perhaps this is true – for the remembrancers,' Bardo said.
'But they discipline themselves for years before drinking the
kalla. Why do you think they restrict it so?'
'But Thomas Rane has said– '
  Bardo suddenly stamped his foot against the floorstones and
laughed out, Thomas Rane! By God, he's as wild at heart as you.
But even he must know that if we go spraying our kalla into the
mouths of humanity, then some poor people will be lost in a
very unmetaphorical insanity and die very real deaths.'
  Danlo looked down at his empty hands and said, To live, I
die.'
  'Still speaking in your goddamned metaphors, eh? Well,
listen, Little Fellow, I can't let you lose yourself in the
kalla.'
'Please do not worry about me.'
 'Well, I have to,' Bardo said. 'Because of who you are. You
may not like it, but you're an exemplar, now. As is Hanuman.
Both of you – the Lords of the Order are watching what we do,
and we can't have our best young Ringists annihilating
themselves with kalla, can we?'
609
  Danlo slipped his shakuhachi out of his pocket and held it
cupped in his fingers. 'If we are forbidden to drink deeply of
the kalla,' he said, 'how can you think we will remembrance the
deepest part of the Eddas?'
   'Ah, the Eddas,' Bardo said as he rubbed his eyes. 'I must
confess a thing to you. I, for myself, don't care if I ever
remembrance them again. There, I've said it. I've had my three
sips of kalla, and I've seen the burning oceans of hell – or
heaven – and it's nearly driven me mad. In truth, no one needs
to remembrance the Eddas so deeply. At least, not more than
once. The goddamned paradoxes. The Way of Ringess can't be just
for a few prophets and prodigies. I've a responsibility to the
spirit of Ringism, to anyone who wants to follow the Way. Even
those who'd drown in the Eddas, if we let them. The goddamned
Elder Eddas – yes, I admit there's truth there, the truth of
how we can become gods. And that's the way of Ringess. The only
way. The great memories can lead us toward that truth, but it's
madness to become lost in them.'
  Out of respect for Bardo's thinking and his passion, Danlo
bowed his head. He put the flute to his lips, then, and began
to play a song that he had spent the last few days composing.
'Am I wrong, then? Do you think I'm wrong?'
 Danlo looked at Bardo, and he felt all his gladness for the
huge man concentrating in his eyes. He said nothing and
continued to play.
  'By God, is it wrong to protect our friends? I'm afraid for
you, Little Fellow.'
 An intensely melodic music spilled out around Danlo, but the
acoustics of the room were dead and only accentuated his
shakuhachi's shrillness. The sound of it was high and harsh
and cold, and he listened as it broke in waves against the
snow-covered dome. It suddenly came to him that Bardo was
right, that he must renounce the drinking of large dosages of
kalla. In truth, he must renounce kalla altogether, but not
because of the danger of madness. For
610
 him, if not for all seekers of remembrance, there were other
dangers more insidious and subtle. Kalla was truly a blessed
drug, truly a window to the world within. As with all windows
to deep reality, however, he thought that the kalla might
actually limit his experience of the Elder Eddas; it might
stain or blur his vision in a vital way, thus keeping him from
the deepest apprehension of the One Memory.
  After he had finished his song, Danlo slid his flute back
into his pocket. He said, 'Do not be afraid, Bardo. I ... will
drink no more kalla.'
  'What!' Bardo stood next to him, and his eyes were wide open
with puzzlement. 'What did you say?'
 'The kalla,' Danlo said, 'its very blessedness ... is a force
that I must not come to rely on.'
'And so you'd renounce it?'
'Yes.'
'Completely?'
'Yes.'
 'How can you stand there, after all that's been said, and
tell me with a smile on your goddamned face that you'll give
up kalla so easily?'
  Danlo held his hand up to his mouth, then said, 'Not ...
easily.' As he scratched the thick beard covering his chin and
neck, he explained to Bardo his reasons for renouncing kalla.
  'Ahhh,' Bardo said, 'are you certain that you're not merely
angry with me? I'm afraid my restricting the kalla has made you
bitter.'
  Danlo laughed and shook his head. 'I am not angry with you.'
'But you'll have no more remembrances!'
'I did not say that.'
 'But you won't be able to share the kalla at the ceremonies,
will you?'
 'That is true,' Danlo admitted. 'But there are other paths
... toward the great memories. If I am still welcome in
611
your house, I would like to ask Master Rane to teach me the
remembrancing attitudes.'
  'But there are sixty-four attitudes!' Bardo roared out.
'Most people spend a lifetime learning them.'
'Perhaps I will have a short life and learn them quickly.'
 'Some people never learn them,' Bardo said, obviously not
amused by Danlo's little joke. 'But even supposing that you're
a prodigy, or even a prophet, and that you accomplish all that
you dream of, by natural means, what then? You can't spend the
rest of your life absorbed into a goddamned memory.'
  For a little while, they discussed the art of remembrancing,
and then Danlo said, 'You look to the Eddas for clues and
directions toward personal godhood. That is your way, and
perhaps it is a true and splendid way. But I think that my way
is ... something other.'
'Ah, do I dare ask what this way might be?'
 'I am not sure,' Danlo said. 'But someday, if I remembrance
deeply enough, then I shall know.'
  'Well, then,' Bardo said, as he rubbed his hands together,
'I wish you well. And I wish I could remain here chatting with
you, but someone must guide tonight's remembrance, eh?'
 So saying he ambled off toward the stairway, but just before
he went down to the party below, he pirouetted and said, 'Oh,
Little Fellow, of course you're always welcome in my house.'
  Danlo stood there alone, then, and he stared out through the
curving windows at the streets of the Old City. Snow was
falling now, and off toward the East-West Sliddery, the ice and
the trees and the houses were covered with a new layer of
soreesh snow. The quiet and the whiteness recalled the forests
of his childhood, where he had first caught a glimpse of the
rare white thallow. It had been a long time since he had
thought of Ahira, and longer still since he had prayed to his
other-self. He did not like to think that he continued to see
the world through the
612
symbols of a primitive totem system, but in truth, whenever he
was most troubled and walked alone through a grove of trees or
through the deserted City cemeteries, a part of him always
listened for Ahira's wild cry. He listened for it now, and
strangely, even though he was encased in a dome of synthetic
glass and cut off from the night, he heard a bird scream out in
his killing ecstasy. The scream was inside him, he suddenly
realized; it was only a memory of Ahira digging its talons into
a sleekit's neck. And then a deeper memory came, a truth of the
Elder Eddas: That thou art. The thallow's cry shrilled out and
filled the universe inside him, and he remembered, I that
sound.
 He knew then that his way toward the godhead, if such a way
really existed, would be both marvellous and terrible. He stood
there pressing his forehead against the cold clary dome, and he
gladly would have told Bardo this – or Hanuman – but no one was
there to listen.
613



CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

The Art of Odori

Once, when he was a young man, thirteen yean before his
Completion, The Perfect One became drunk on wine and gambled
away his family estates on a single throw of dice. And Sarojin
Garuda, who was his brother and chief disciple, said to him,
'You have thrown away our lives, for now we shall have neither
money to spend, food to eat, nor a roof over us to keep us dry
when the rains come.'
  And The Perfect One replied, 'All life is a gamble into the
unknown. Now the sky must be our roof, and we must spend our
lives Perfecting ourselves. And when we are Complete, we shall
never be hungry again.'
 'Do you mean,' Sarojin Garuda asked, 'that we shall nourish
our souls with the wind and sun, and that the union with the
Whole will fill us with joy?'
  And The Perfect One, who is also called The Laughing ,
replied, 'Of course, but I also mean that when we achieve
Completion, our followers will give us their bread, their
clothes, their very lives.'
  'But how will you attract followers when it is discovered
you were so foolish as to drink wine and gamble away our
estates?'
 And The Perfect One replied, 'As you will see, the people
love no one so much as a perfect sinner who repents and becomes
a perfect saint.'
  'Then you are ready to repent and give up all vice?' Garuda
asked.
 And The Perfect One laughed and replied, 'No, not yet.'
  After that The Perfect One went down to the South Lands, and
he seduced the daughters of the vintners and drank their
 614
wine, and he danced the forbidden dances, and he ate the
magic mushrooms that grew in the forests. He wandered for
thirteen years before coming to the Holy City. There, at the
Pool of Eternity, he renounced the world and achieved
Completion, and all that he had prophesied came to pass.
  Many years later, The Perfect One acquired palaces for each
of the six seasons, and he filled them with priceless
sculptures and fine wines; he took for himself 313 concubines
and fathered four times as many children; he began to dance
and eat mushrooms and throw dice again. Sarojin Garuda came
to him and said, 'Once again you've fallen into vice.'
  And The Perfect One replied, 'In Completion all distincare
as One, and there is neither vice nor virtue. The advantage
of being Perfected is that one can see this clearly.'
  'But the people,' Sarojin Garuda said, after considering ,
'are far from Perfection and do not see what you see.'
 And The Perfect One replied, 'And that is why they love me
as they do. They know that a Perfect One is beyond the good
or evil of the world, and thus nothing can touch him.'
  Then The Perfect One began to laugh, and in listening this
holy laughter, the mind of Sarojin Garuda was freed of all
doubt and imperfection, and he finally achieved what he had
been seeking all his life. They both laughed together for a
very long time, and they died very old, very rich, and very
Complete.
 – from The Life of The Perfect One

During the early days of winter, as Danlo studied the
remembrancing attitudes under Master Thomas Rane or spent long,
lascivious hours with Tamara in front of a blazing wood fire
learning a very different art, he kept his promise to renounce
kalla. But his single, great remembrance could be neither
renounced nor forgotten. Bardo had warned him that he (and
Hanuman, too) would become an exemplar for others, and so he
did: ironically, the radical Ringists, those who would drink
kalla freely,
615
 regarded Danlo as something of a hero, and they sought to
emulate his wildness and his deed, if not his renunciation.
This clique, though never large, included Ringists who were
close to Bardo, such as the diva, Nirvelli, and Dario Chu. And
at least two of Thomas Rane's memory guides fell into the
secret worship of kalla. The brothers Jonathan and Benjamin Hur
(of the infamous Darkmoon Hurs) embezzled a large quantity of
kalla from Bardo's storeroom, and they let it flow in rivers
among their friends and confederates. Unknown to Bardo, they
held secret remembrances in various apartments throughout the
City, and sometimes, when they were feeling especially bold,
within the very rooms of Bardo's house. Jonathan Hur, himself,
spent much time alone in the Well, floating in a saltwater pool
as the kalla rushed through him in cold, lucent streams and
carried him down into the deep memories. He contrived it so
that his friends were allowed free use of the Well. And then,
in secret, he served them kalla and abandoned them, each to his
own wisdom, will, and vision. It was the glory and conceit of
these radical Ringists that, at any moment, one of their number
should always occupy a tank in the Well. When one of their
fellowship was finished journeying through the world inside,
another would drink three sips of kalla and take her place, and
in this way, working in shifts, they sought to remembrance the
Elder Eddas continuously. This wild and clandestine worship
might have gone on for a long time, but inevitably, the weight
of antichance fell against them. A wormrunner named Isas
Nikitovich managed to drown himself in one of the tanks, and
worse (from Bardo's very selfish point of view) a brilliant
journeyman akashic swallowed at least fifteen sips of kalla and
did not return from her journey. Or rather, she returned in
madness, emptier in the eye than any autist. When Bardo heard
the news that one of his favourite lovers had been disfigured
in the mind, he wept, then flew into a rage and smashed nine
priceless Agathanian alaya shells before Surya Lal calmed him.
He
616
was heard to shout out, 'By God, if I can't trust my guides
with the goddamned kalla, who can I trust?'
   This remark was to prove most ominous. It heralded the great
changes about to take place within the Way of Ringess. The
cult, at this time, was splitting into three factions, none of
which trusted the others completely. There was Jonathan Hur's
kalla fellowship, of course, and also the main body of
Ringists, the seekers who were glad to attend the ceremonies of
remembrance and receive their two sips of kalla. They were less
interested in the Elder Eddas, as an experience of its own,
than in discovering how they each might grow into godhood. The
third faction was an offshoot from this main body. From the
very beginning quite a few Ringists were unable to remembrance
the Eddas – either that or they could not make sense of their
memories. In truth, they were too stupid or lazy to learn the
techniques of remembrancing, and above all, they were too
afraid. They avoided or renounced the drinking of kalla, not
because they sought a clearer way of seeing things, but because
the journey into themselves terrified them. They were drawn to
Ringism for the most basic of reasons: they sensed that Bardo
and his inner circle had discovered a way toward something vast
and important, something beyond their individual concerns, and
they desperately wanted to be a part of this movement. If they
could not know the light dance of pure remembrance, in
themselves, then at least the satisfaction of intense
religiousness could still be theirs. Bardo's house, day and
night, seemed aglow with intensity and a sense of
possibilities. It was enough for some people to bask in the
golden radiance of luminaries such as Danlo, or the beautiful
and accomplished Nirvelli, or even Thomas Rane, for it is
always easier to stand beneath the light of another than to
shine with one's own. Many spoke of new directions in
evolution, of the infinite possibilities of the human race, but
few were willing to make even the slightest of changes in
themselves. They dreamed of transforming their bodies
617
and minds into something new, something vast and marvellous,
but they lacked the courage to create their own fate. They
thought they wanted to become as gods, and some of them wanted
to want a path towards the godly, but they were as insincere as
rich astriers who profess compassion for the poor, and all the
while hoard diamonds and firestones and other precious jewels.
And so they gave up kalla and substituted excitement as their
drug; they mistook zeal for true ecstasy; they satisfied their
longings for transcendence with promises and hopes, even as
they neglected the dangerous work of going over themselves. In
this way, they betrayed themselves, and they fomented
revolution instead of the evolution of humankind. They were a
nervous and desperate people, all too eager to believe that the
Golden Ring would protect them from the fury of the Vild, or
that if they tried to follow the way of a man who had become a
god, a little of his divinity might cling to their grasping
hands. These were the failed and false seekers, and other
Ringists derisively referred to them as 'godlings' or
'godchildren'. In the early days of winter in the year 2953
since the founding of Neverness, this faction of godchildren
still composed only a tenth of the membership of Bardo's cult.
  'But everyday there are more of them,' Thomas Rane confided
to Danlo one night after he had helped him through the 41st
attitude of remembrancing. He had been meeting with Danlo
almost every evening after dinner – on those evenings when
Danlo couldn't contrive to visit Tamara – and he was very proud
to be tutoring him in his art. Though he rarely favoured Danlo
with words of praise, it was his way to praise him indirectly,
negatively, through denigrating the efforts and skills of
others. 'Remembrancing is the most treacherous of the arts: at
first it's all roses, roses, roses, and soon enough, thorns,
thorns, thorns. People give up too easily. And some people
never learn the discipline of the self. Unfortunately, I'm
afraid these are the very people Bardo will attract, if he
tries to expand
618
 this little cult of ours. We've already given our kalla to the
City's most brilliant – who's left? Now, shall we return to
deism, or would you rather proceed to the mythopoesis
attitude?'
  To be sure, none of the three factions was ever a discrete
group, completely separated from the others. Many of the kalla
fellowship sought personal godhood as well as remembrance of
the One Memory. Many seekers would burn for transcendence like
stars in the night, only to stumble out of bed one morning
red-eyed, discouraged, doubting, full of coldness towards
themselves and their deepest dreams. A few of these might
rekindle their passion for a while, but most would look for
easier ways of annihilating the longing inside them. And it was
never easy to tell when a seeker had left her path to become a
godchild of Ringism who blindly followed another's way. Many
there were who accused others of falsity and faithlessness,
even as they gouged out their inner eyes and knelt raptly while
Danlo or Bardo spoke of the wonders of the Elder Eddas. Bardo's
house became something of an arena where Ringists of all
factions vied with one another for spiritual superiority. Or
rather, his brilliantly decorated rooms were like sets of a
stage: at any time of day, men and women would sally down the
glittering hallways, seeking each other out. They would pose
and smile and beam at one another; they worked their faces into
the silliest and most simple of configurations as they tried to
emote an aura of enlightenment. They acted as they imagined
godlings should act, and, subtly, slowly, they tried to shape
each other into this idealized image of the perfect Ringist.
People were always seeking to fix another's eyes, always
looking deep into the eyelight as if to ask: 'Have you
remembranced the Elder Eddas?' Or, more pointedly, 'Are you
becoming a god?' And no one was a more fervent devotee of this
game than Surya Surata Lal. She played it with Danlo and
Hanuman and Tamara, and she played it with the brothers Hur,
and she played it with any new Ringist who came into Bardo's
619
house; in truth, she very probably played it staring into a
mirror at herself.
  'She has no real talent for remembrancing,' Thomas Rane
confided to Danlo. 'And that is a pity because she tries very
hard. Too hard, I think.'
 In some respects, Surya Lal was typical of those who went
back and forth between being seekers and mere followers of the
Way. Although she was never lazy and she possessed an outward
courage and intelligence that fooled even her friends, when it
came time to find the way into herself, she would blink her red
little eyes and purse her little lips, and fall stubborn, as
dull and stolid as a musk ox. She had little imagination. She
curried the good opinion of others, and so she began pretending
that her remembrances were deeper and more profound than they
really were. Because she clung to the prettiness of her own
self-image, try though she might, she always balked at applying
to herself the insights of her best memories. She was afraid of
personal change, and of wildness, and she was jealous of those
who had no such fear. From the very beginning, she resented
Danlo's ability to delve into the heart of the Elder Eddas. She
wrongly saw this ability as springing from kalla, hence her
disapproval of that marvellous drug.
  One night, after the kalla ceremony, she was heard to say,
'No one can know if Danlo's first remembrance was a great one
or just a descent into illusion. I'm beginning to mistrust this
kalla. It's far too dangerous to give to the inexperienced.'
  As the days grew shorter and the weather colder, she began
to mistrust the very act of remembrancing. She was envious of
Thomas Rane and Danlo, and if the truth be told, even of
Hanuman li Tosh. Since she lacked the skill to explore the
great memories, she could never teach others the remembrancing
art, never become a guide and an authority in Bardo's nascent
church. Thus she sought to control the remembrancing ceremony,
and ultimately, to undo it altogether. After the drowning of
Isas Nikitovich,
620
 she argued against giving kalla to new Ringists. It was her
idea to substitute plain sea water for the kalla at the nightly
ceremonies. She implored Bardo to make this change. And Bardo,
for his own reasons, heeded her strident words. Beginning on
the evening of the 48th of winter, those bearing their first
invitation to Bardo's house were given water as a symbol and
sacrament, while more experienced Ringists received their two
sips of kalla doled out from Bardo's diamond-studded jigger. It
might be thought that this corruption of the ceremony would
have alienated many people, but ironically it had the opposite
effect. Would-be godlings could now flock to Bardo's house
without fearing that they would be required to accomplish
anything so arduous or risky as self-remembrance. Indeed, more
than a few longtime Ringists, who were sick of the kalla, were
only too glad to sip water in its place. As for the new
converts burning for a taste of the holy drug (approximately
one third fell into this category) they could always hope to be
admitted to the elect of Bardo's new religion. They could do
this by attending at least thirty-three remembrancing
ceremonies, by professing a faith that human beings could
become as gods if only they would follow the example of Mallory
Ringess, and most importantly, by surrendering at least a tenth
of their worldly wealth and income to the Way.
  'We need money,' Bardo confessed one night. In his tea room,
he had called together those closest to him. Surya Surata Lal
and Thomas Rane were of this inner circle, of course, as were
Kolenya Mor, Nirvelli, Hanuman, and Danlo. The brothers Hur,
after the Nikitovich incident, had fallen from favour, and so
they were not invited to sit at Bardo's exquisite tea table, to
drink the rare teas and thick Summerworld coffees that Bardo
served in little white cups. There's now a twenty-day wait for
invitations to the remembrances – we can't fit all the seekers
who want to attend one into this house. Therefore, we need to
buy a property that will accommodate everyone. A couple of
621
blocks off Danladi Square, there's an abandoned building I'd
like to consider acquiring. A grand building, a glorious
building. But it's hideously expensive. As my cousin has
pointed out, the only way to finance such an acquisition would
be for the new Ringists to pay for it.'
  Now, Bardo had organized his cult as most religions have
been organized since the beginning of civilization: he was
Lord, High Priest and Guru of the followers of the Way, and he
ruled on all church matters with absolute authority. He had no
real need to consult others. But he was always a reasonable,
congenial man who loved good drink and the interplay of
friendly argument. He invited comment, and so he couldn't have
been surprised when Thomas Rane said, There are already too
many godchildren. Too many new Ringists. We should cull the
best of these and discourage the others. The Way needs fewer
seekers, not more.'
  'I strongly disagree,' Surya said as she tapped her teacup.
'We've a duty to teach the Way of Ringess across the Civilized
Worlds. And possibly beyond – wherever human beings are still
human.'
 Danlo, who had never really understood the getting and
spending of money, looked at Bardo and said, 'If you require
new Ringists to pay money in order to attend the ceremonies,
then this is ... tantamount to selling the kalla, yes?'
  'Ah, but this is the wrong way to view the situation,' Bardo
said. 'We – any who call themselves Ringists – are simply
buying a building. We'll own it in common, each Ringist holding
shares according to his or her contribution to the Way.'
  'But what of those who have no money to contribute?' Danlo
asked.
 'Well,' Bardo said, 'they won't be able to hold any property
in condominium, will they?'
'But you will allow them to attend the ceremonies?'
 'Of course,' Bardo said. 'The Way of Ringess is open to
everyone.'
622
'Even autists?'
'Even autists, Little Fellow.'
 'But what of the Order, then? The novices and journeymen,
most of the academicians ... what of their vows of poverty?'
  'Ah, but that is a delicate matter,' Bardo said, and he
slurped down a cup of his sweet, black coffee and ate a cookie.
'From all new Ringists we'll require a tenth of all property
and income. At least. But a tenth of nothing is still nothing,
eh? Those who are truly poor will pay nothing.'
  As Bardo and Danlo argued finances for a while, it became
clear that Bardo considered few of the Order to be truly poor.
He pointed out that journeymen and novices, who don't even own
their own clothes, often come from wealthy families. 'It's been
my experience that everyone likes a little money pressing his
palms, and almost everyone hoards a little. Or they can acquire
it, or create it.'
 'I have never even seen a City disk,' Danlo said. 'Much less
held one in my hand.'
 'Well, that's because of the way you grew up. But even Danlo
the Wild could get money, if there was a great enough need.'
  'I do not think so,' Danlo said. In truth, he thought the
invention and use of money was shaida, one of civilization's
worst perversions, and he could not imagine ever wanting any.
 'If you had to, you could sell yourself on Strawberry
Street.' This came from Hanuman li Tosh, who had been sitting
quietly at the end of the table. He was referring, of course,
to the male brothels down in the worst part of the Farsider's
Quarter. Although he hadn't touched his coffee, his eyes, his
hand motions, his entire body and being seemed electric with
alertness, as if he had just drunk nine cups of coffee. He
looked at Danlo, and his face radiated awareness of the cruelty
in his words. This rare cruelty caused Danlo to stare at
Hanuman in disbelief and despair. Everyone at the table must
have sensed the hurt flowing
623
 between them. 'I'm sorry, now I've wounded you,' Hanuman said.
He spoke as if he and Danlo were the only two people at the
table. 'I really didn't mean to.'
 Bardo – and most of the others – suddenly seemed very intent
on eating their cookies and drinking their tea. Nobody spoke.
  'No one should have to sell themselves for money,' Nirvelli
finally said in her beautiful, dulcet voice. She was wearing
white pyjamas, and the contrast against her black skin was
striking. 'Is the Way of Ringess about money, or is it about
joy? Pleasure can be bought and sold, as I well know, but joy
is beyond price.'
 'This talk of money demeans us,' Thomas Rane put in, and his
face was hard with disapproval.
  'Money is just money,' Surya said. 'And we have to decide
how to accept money from those of the Order able to
contribute,' here she gave Danlo a swift, chiding look, then
continued, The young pilot is correct that most of the Order
have taken vows of poverty. Therefore, they can't own property,
not even in condominium.'
  Bardo swished some coffee inside his mouth before
swallowing. He belched, waved his hand as if to shoo away a
furfly, then said, a little too carelessly, 'But this problem
of ownership is really a non-problem. All Ordermen who can't
own property can make a donation to established Ringists. Even
if they must make this donation in secret. Property can then be
held in trust for them by these Ringists. This should satisfy
the Order's goddamned canons.'
  If it was Surya Lal who first suggested squeezing money from
the new Ringists, and Bardo who schemed to legally implement
such a tithe, then Hanuman li Tosh must be credited with
attracting the flood of converts that would soon swell Bardo's
church. (Just as he must be blamed for the ultimate corrupting
of the Way.) To give a full account of his remarkable
transformation and his rise to religious authority, it is
necessary first to say more of his quest to understand the
universal nature of suffering.
624
  Those who follow that part of themselves which is great are
great men; those who follow that part of themselves which is
little are little men' – thus spoke the great Lao Tzu millennia
before Hanuman was born. He might have been foretelling
Hanuman's astonishing career, for Hanuman's whole life was a
tragic blending of the little and the great. At first, however,
to the followers of the Way, only the great part was obvious.
He was very young to become a leader of a great religious
movement. Some thought that he was too young, but others
pointed out that the Emperor Aleksandar had been as young when
he tried to conquer Old Earth, and that Jin Zenimura had been
only two years older when he repudiated the Order of the
Warrior-Poets and founded Zanshin. As it happened, Hanuman's
youth was a sword that cut two ways, both of which aided his
rise: his admirers cited his age and accomplishments as proof
of his genius, while his detractors dismissed him as merely a
vain young man full of pretensions and impossible ideals and
didn't take him seriously until it was too late.
 Danlo was perhaps the only one to descry Hanuman's true
potential. Once, after an empty remembrancing ceremony in which
they both sipped only salt water, Danlo found Hanuman alone
with the ferns and the waterfall in Bardo's meditation room,
and he said, The most dangerous kind of idealist... is one who
has the power to make his ideals real.'
'And you think I have ideals?' Hanuman laughed out.
 'Truly, since the night of your great remembrance, you have
envisioned something. A fate and way for human beings. I can
almost see it. You never talk about it, but in the silence, in
the shadow of your thoughts ... this fate.'
'I believe in free will, you should know.'
'Why can't we talk any more?' Danlo asked.
'I talk all the time. You never listen.'
  'But the others ... they listen, yes? The godchildren. For
them, your words are like quicksilver, and you speak
625
and speak, and more and more people knock at Bardo's gates to
listen.'
  How is it that a few rare people can compel the attention of
others? Why should any one person, or whole swarms of people,
stand in a driving snow, entranced, while they listen to
another's words and feel the pounding of his passion and drink
in the fire of his eyes? If it is true that Hanuman li Tosh was
born with the gift of tongues, then it is equally true that all
his studies and his life's experience contributed towards
developing this gift. He was a cetic. No one should ever forget
that he was of the Order's oldest discipline, a way of mastery
reaching far back to the deserts and forests of Old Earth. To
be exact, he was a cyber-shaman, and at the age of twenty-one,
he had nearly mastered the different states of computer
consciousness. This mastery would be of critical importance to
the Order, to Neverness, to all the worlds on which human
beings live and call themselves civilized. But for all his
skill at interfacing the cybernetic spaces, he had not ignored
the other cetic branches. From the yogin he had learned
meditation, psychedelics, the body arts, rhapsody, chanting and
inner theatre. And from the neurologicians: configuration, face
dancing, ritual analysis, mythopoeisis, charisma, and outer
theatre. All the cetic branches had incorporated the Fravashi
language philosophies, and Hanuman became adept at using word
drugs to soothe others' suspicions. He learned to analyse
belief systems and to design specific word keys that would free
his listeners from their conceptual prisons. And, as Danlo soon
discovered, to his horror, Hanuman began creating in those
around him wholly new mental prisons that bound them to
Hanuman's words, to his vision, to his burning sense of his own
fate.
 Ultimately, though, it was his great remembrance that
bestowed upon him the mantle of prophet. He had said that the
death of a god was recorded in the Elder Eddas. At first many
ridiculed this remembrance. The pilots, especially, called his
memory a drugged delusion: six
626
hundred years earlier, Dario the Bold had mapped all the stars
and planets of the 18th Deva Cluster, and no such god, alive or
dead, had been discovered. Hanuman's prediction – or memory –
might have been quickly forgotten if the Lord Pilot had not
spoken so vociferously against kalla and the remembrancing
ceremonies. Chanoth Chen Ciceron, one day at the Lords'
College, cited Hanuman's remembrance as an example of the kind
of danger that Bardo's cult posed the Order. 'We must forbid
all novices and journeymen contact with Bardo's cult,' he told
the assembled lords. 'Otherwise, we'll see the minds of our
brightest youths destroyed.'
  Now, Lord Ciceron had many enemies, not the least of whom
was the maverick pilot known as the Sonderval. The Sonderval
had fought side by side with Bardo in the Pilots' War against
Leopold Soli and Lord Ciceron. Because the Sonderval despised
Lord Ciceron and hoped to humiliate him (and because he was one
of the most arrogant human beings ever born) on a whim he
decided to journey to the 18th Deva Cluster. In his lightship,
the Cardinal Virtue, he required only three days to reach the
Cluster. He had the fixed-points of the red giant star that
Hanuman had divulged to Danlo. He was perhaps the finest pilot
in the City, perhaps the only one able to use the Continuum
Hypothesis, the Great Theorem of the pilots, as it should be
used. He journeyed across the stars of the galaxy from
Neverness to the Deva Cluster in a single fall. It took him
fifteen days to locate the corpse of the dead god. It was as
big as a moon and had a glittering diamond skin ten miles
thick; its brain was composed of neurologics of a kind the
eschatologists had never seen before. As Hanuman had predicted,
it orbited a red giant star which the Sonderval immediately
named Hanuman's Glory. And indeed, this discovery did bring
Hanuman sudden glory. It brought glory and credibility to the
Way of Ringess. Upon the Sonderval's return to Neverness,
within half a day, the news that a god had truly died had
spread across the City.
627
 'This will prove the power of remembrancing,' Thomas Rane
said to Danlo. 'Now everyone will come to me and demand I show
them the way to the Elder Eddas.'
  But Thomas Rane, who understood so much about remembrance
and the individual human mind, was quite ignorant of mass
religious fervour. Most of the would-be converts to Ringism
that winter did not come to Bardo's house to be guided by
Thomas Rane. They came to behold such phenomenons as Bardo and
Danlo wi Soli Ringess, and most of all, they came because they
were curious about Hanuman's great remembrance. They wanted to
be close to him, to hear his voice, to touch the silken sleeve
of his robe as they stood drinking ice-wine with him or eating
spicy little meats in Bardo's sunroom. Although Hanuman never
spoke of kalla, never again delivered another prophecy, his
very silence created about him an air of mystery and power. He
would listen attentively as strange women and men confessed
their dreams to him, and all the while, he would look into
their eyes and hidden fears as if peering into the very heart
of the Elder Eddas. Almost everyone remarked upon his
compassion, his rare and unique understanding of others' pain.
He, himself, burned with memories; his face shone with the
awareness of a terrible and primeval force buried deep within.
People sensed this about him. Such awareness cannot be created
at will, nor can it be faked using the techniques of charisma
or outer theatre. It is as real and compelling as an electric
storm at night; it's like the smell of ozone in the air after a
lightning bolt has struck. People swarmed around Hanuman li
Tosh because he was connected to the deepest of forces, and
through him they felt the pulse-beat of a universe that was
more poignant and intense than they had ever known, and
infinitely more real.
 Soon after his great remembrance, after he had recuperated
and begun counselling Ringists at Bardo's parties, he set out
to strengthen this dark connection. Because he wanted to
understand everything about pain and suffering,
628
 he began to cultivate for himself a secret life. Unknown to
his fellow cetics or to Danlo, he began climbing the icy cliffs
of Mt Attakel, where they loomed like a gleaming white wall
above the Elf Gardens. He would don a heated kamelaika, pull on
a pair of friction boots and force his way up the crumbly,
rotten rock faces. He always climbed alone, without the aid of
a rope or net. Many times he suffered frostbite of fingers and
face, and twice he lost toes, which had to be regenerated in
secret at the cloning shop. Many times he was close to the pain
and terror of falling. But alone, he could only know his terror
and his pain, and so he turned to other pursuits. He sought out
and entered zanshin tournaments. He fought with fists and
elbows and feet until both he and his partners were broken and
bloody. He fought bravely, never betraying the slightest
tension or anxiety, and he earned many points for demonstrating
a perfectly relaxed and alert posture in the face of maiming,
and rarely, even brain disfiguration and death. Other passions
of his were less dangerous, though no less cruel. At night he
would journey deep into the Farsider's Quarter and purchase
otherworldly delights from the alien Friends of Man. He
solicited male whores, and he mistreated them, not because it
gave him pleasure but because it brought them pain. In truth,
the act of coupling with alien females and graceless, sculpted
young men sickened him, and he did so only to discover how much
sickness he could endure. This descent into darkness went on
all during the deep, dry snows of winter, even as he delivered
little sermons about the virtue of gods to Bardo's guests, and
once, when Bardo was ill from eating too many chocolate
cookies, conducted the nightly ceremony himself in Bardo's
music room. It was only by chance (or perhaps it was fate) that
Danlo discovered his friend's secret life.
  One evening, after Danlo had spent the day studying the
mathematics of the manifold, he was out in the Old City looking
for a cafe in which to take his evening meal. He was very
hungry; he had become lost in the intricacies
629
 and elegance of the Great Theorem, and he hadn't eaten
anything since the previous night. He was contemplating a rich
dinner of kurmash, peas and saffron rice when he espied Hanuman
ahead of him, weaving his way among the skaters filling the
street. Hanuman was dressed out of colour, in a formal
kamelaika and a gleaming brown fur; he might have been mistaken
for a rich pilgrim or a farsider. Danlo thought to call to him,
to ask him if he wanted to share a grand bowl of kurmash, but
Hanuman's dress and secretive manner bade him keep his
distance. He decided, out of sheer caprice, to follow him. For
two blocks he kept a good distance between them, watching
Hanuman stroke his distinctive and skilled strokes. And then
Hanuman turned onto the Serpentine, and the crowds of people
thickened up. The snowploughs had heaped glittering white
drifts to the sides of the street, closing the slow lanes.
Skaters were all forced onto a ribbon of ice between this wall
of snow and the sleds rocketing down the centre of the street.
Danlo had to stay close behind Hanuman lest he lose him.
Self-important men and women in expensive furs jostled him,
blocked his way, and shot him anxious looks as he darted among
them. The skating was quite treacherous. A fresh layer of snow
covered the street and muffled the hard striking sound of
Danlo's skates. He couldn't see his skate blades cutting the
ice, couldn't make out the divots, rills and bumps that one
usually avoids. With difficulty he followed Hanuman down the
Serpentine where it curves west into the Farsider's Quarter. At
the edge of the Diamond District, Hanuman turned off onto a
lesser sliddery. Snow completely obscured the redness of the
ice, and at first Danlo did not realize that they were making
their way up Strawberry Street. Then he noticed the brothels
lining the street on both sides: cold stone row houses without
lights or windows. The street was dark and peopled with
worm-runners, wealthy men and middling-old women, avid and
nervous in their hooded furs. Outside the brothel doors
630
were beautiful boys and young men wearing tight silk
kamelaikas; among them stood dangerous-looking procurers who
rudely whistled at the passers-by. Danlo had a strong sense
that he was in a place he shouldn't be, that many eyes were
watching him, appraising him, wondering what a young pilot
should be seeking in such a district. He himself wondered that
Hanuman could make his way down the street with so great an
ease, as if the smells of incense, perfume and burning jambool
were quite familiar to him. It amused and alarmed him to think
that Hanuman might have a taste for young men. He expected that
Hanuman would stop momentarily before one of the brothels'
luridly carved doors, but then Hanuman suddenly turned down a
dark alley and vanished.
  Now very much alarmed, Danlo followed him down the icy gap
between two brothels, which were built so close together that
two men could not have squeezed between them shoulder to
shoulder. He was very near the district's edge. In front of
him, gleaming out of the darkness, was a snowy embankment
separating the line of brothels from crumbling old buildings
that might have been flung up three thousand years earlier. He
thought these ugly buildings must be restaurants, for the air
smelled of baked breads and pastries, cheese and cilka, garlic
and meats roasting over an open fire. Strawberry Street runs
near the Bell District, so-called because its network of
streets, as seen from the air, takes on the shape of a great
purple bell. It seemed that Hanuman was skating toward the Bell
and intended somehow to enter it. For a moment, Danlo did not
understand how this could be so. Strawberry Street is a red
gliddery, whereas all the streets in the Bell except the main
one are of purple. In Neverness, red glidderies connect only
with the major orange glidderies, or with each other; the
purple glidderies intersect green glissades. Red streets never
flow into those that are purple. Thus the City is something of
a topological nightmare, and travel between the districts is
often circuitous and difficult. Long
631
ago, the Timekeeper had ordered the City built this way. He had
wanted to isolate the various sects and alien races should it
ever be necessary to close off the streets in case of rebellion
or war. From almost the very beginning, however, the people had
undermined his plan. In many places throughout the City, the
harijan and other peoples had built illegal white streets
connecting the red and purple glidderies, and thus connecting
the City's many districts. When Danlo reached the end of the
alley, behind the brothels vibrating with strange musics and
muffled cries, he surmised that he had discovered one of these
illegal streets, for the alley did not dead-end as it should
have. Rather, it cut through the embankment, through a black
tunnel hung with hollow sounds, and gave out onto a narrow
walkway of ice leading into the Bell. He cheerfully followed
Hanuman onto this walkway. He followed him onto a well-lit
purple gliddery lined with apartments and various shops. He saw
him enter a windowless restaurant, a dingy old building of
flaking sandstone that it would have been easy to ignore. Danlo
stood across the street leaning on his knees, watching the
restaurant door and wondering what he should do.
  For a long while he waited, wearing grooves in the ice as he
slid his skate blades back and forth. It was very cold, the
kind of cold that Danlo once would have called haradu. It had
begun snowing again. Millions of delicate snow-flakes danced
violet and rose in the light of the flame globes. The smells of
delicious foods floated all around him. He remembered, then,
that he planned to meet Tamara later that night. He would need
to eat very soon, to fortify himself for that meeting. At last
he decided to join Hanuman inside the restaurant, even though
he could see it was a private one and he had no money. Since
coming to Neverness, he had eaten only in free restaurants, and
he was quite ignorant of the etiquette of exchanging money for
food.
Upon opening the outer doors, in a foyer full of coat
632
closets, alien artifacts and jets of hot air, he was
immediately greeted by a jaded-looking hostess wearing a red
kimono. She took his furs from him and asked if he required a
fry table.
  'I am not sure,' Danlo said. 'I had thought to meet... a
friend.'
'Would your friend already have arrived?'
'Oh, yes, I am sure he is here.'
'Can you tell me his name?'
  Danlo, who still retained his Alaloi inhibition against the
telling of true names, said, 'Most likely he would not have
given his name.'
'But is he an aficionado or a newcomer?'
  'I would think ... that he has not been here more than once
or twice.'
 After waiting a moment and looking askance at Danlo's worn
racing kamelaika, his beard, and his wild hair with the feather
in it, she said, 'Could you describe him, please?'
 'Well, he has a splendid face, perhaps too intense, but
sensitive, and his eyes truly– '
'What does he look like?' the hostess snapped out.
 Danlo quickly bowed his head in anger and shame, and then he
told the hostess what Hanuman looked like.
 'You mean the Worthy Hiroshi li Tal of Simoom,' the hostess
said. 'He's one of our most discriminating aficionados. If
you'll follow me, I'll show you to his table.'
 The hostess opened the inner doors, and without pausing to
let Danlo go first, she led him into a lavishly decorated and
intimate room. The lights were turned down low, so at first
Danlo could see little, just the polished jewood walls, forks
and knives of gleaming steel, and the dark faces of the
aficionados sitting at their tables. As if dazzled by too many
sensa, he moved through a wall of little sounds and odours:
sizzling meats and conversational tidbits, woodsmoke and
scorched oil and icevine burning thick and sweet. Everything
about the room nauseated and repelled him, and yet, he felt
strangely drawn into its
633
 depths, by hunger, by curiosity and by another need for which
he had no name.
  'We have a nice table for you,' the hostess said. 'May you
enjoy your meal.'
 They had walked toward the rear wall, then up a couple of
steps to a slightly higher level where five private tables
overlooked the rest of the room. Hanuman sat in a padded
leather chair with his back to the wall, and he said, 'Hello,
Danlo, I was wondering when you'd come in.'
 Danlo looked at him in amazement and said, 'You knew I was
following you?'
 'Cetics are supposed to know such things, aren't they?'
  'I wanted to see ... where you were going,' Danlo said with
a smile.
 'Well, here I am,' Hanuman said. 'Here we are. If you'd like,
would you please join me?'
  Danlo sat beside him and worked the gloves off his hands. In
front of him was the strangest table he had ever seen: it was
built in the shape of an octagon, and the half of it nearest
him was of black shatterwood, while the far half was sunken
and surfaced with gold. A shallow gutter ran along the edge of
this golden half. He was about to comment on this unique table
when a waiter brought them a plate of slivered kona nuts in
pepper sauce.
  'Have you eaten?' Hanuman asked. 'I've already ordered,
mostly meat dishes, but there will be more than enough other
food to share. You should know, that's the way here, for
everyone seated at the same table, to share.'
  Danlo picked up a pair of bone chopsticks and manoeuvred a
few nut slivers into his mouth. The dish was very hot, very
sweet, very good.
 'How did you get the money to eat here?' Danlo asked.
 'And look at you – your clothes! And why are you using the
name of a Simoom Architect? You despise Architects, yes?'
 He waited for Hanuman to illuminate these mysteries,
634
but Hanuman just sat there, sipping from a goblet of red wine,
staring at him.
'Perhaps you should leave,' Hanuman finally said.
 The words were like drops of hot wax in Danlo's ears; he
shook his head slowly back and forth, unable to understand why
Hanuman would say such a thing.
'Perhaps it would be best if you go.'
 'But, Hanu, is this what you truly want?' Danlo asked. 'Why
did you invite me to sit down, then?'
  After taking another sip of wine, Hanuman picked up his
knife and dragged the sharp edge of it lightly back and forth
across his palm. He seemed puzzled, self-absorbed, aggrieved. A
scryer might have said he was full of remorse for events that
had not yet occurred. Danlo wondered why he would frequent such
a hole-in-the-ice restaurant, with its strange little tables
and wealthy patrons stealing furtive glances at each other.
Close all around was a faint odour of bruised flowers and
burning blood, as well as an air of anticipation that sickened
Danlo and made him want to flee. He might have said his
goodbyes, then, but Hanuman suddenly smiled and told him, 'No,
stay; I've decided you should. I'd thought to spare your
sensibilities, but that's silly of me. Please stay.'
 Hanuman picked up a crystal bottle and asked Danlo if he
would be taking alcohol that evening. Danlo nodded. As he
watched a stream of ruby wine flow into his goblet, he became
aware of a subtle change in the room. The buzz of voices had
died to a few scattered whispers. Just below them, off to the
side, was a wood and gold table at which sat two pairs of men
and women. One of the men was a sullen-looking wormrunner; he
was accompanied by an elegantly dressed common whore, who,
except for her tattooed lips and red-rimmed eyes, might have
passed as an ambassador's wife. The other man and woman each
had brilliant green eyes too large for their delicate faces.
They were obviously engineered farsiders from some
non-civilized world, and it was hard to understand how they
635
 should be sharing a table with a criminal and a whore. All the
patrons in the room were now looking at this table, or rather,
their stares were fixed on a small efficient man standing at
the edge of the table's golden half. This was one of the
restaurant's chefs. He was swaddled completely in white
cottons; he wore a white turban and white slippers and white
cotton gloves; each article of clothing was spattered with dark
red stains. From a steel cart next to the table he removed a
bowl of oil. He quickly dribbled out this oil in zig-zag lines
over the table's golden surface. He then used a broad brush to
spread the oil evenly.
 'Gold heats the most perfectly of all the metals,' Hanuman
explained. 'Which is why the tables are wrought of a gold
alloy.'
  It was now obvious that the chef was about to cook a meal
for the aficionados. Danlo could not tell how the tabletop was
heated – probably by plasma or jets of burning hydrogen – but
in very little time the sheet of oil began to blister and
smoke. The chef reached his hand into a basket on one of the
cart's lower shelves. He grasped a fat, struggling female
sleekit by the neck. The sleekit's body, from snout to tail,
was a quivering pink and white mass which everywhere oozed
blood; moments earlier, in the kitchen, the chef's assistants
had flayed the skin off it. The chef held it up so that
everyone could appreciate its size and sex. In his other hand
he held a metallic device that looked like a nutcracker. He
used it to quickly break each of the sleekit's legs. These
four wrenching motions were accomplished so suddenly that
Danlo scarcely could believe it. He sat frozen to his chair,
holding his breath, watching. The sleekit had remained
curiously silent at the breaking of its legs, but when the
chef heaved it onto the table, it let out a terrible whistling
cry, the way sleekits do when they are mortally wounded. The
sleekit tried to spring off the hot tabletop, and then tried
to run, but its legs were quite useless and could get no
purchase on the
636
 popping oil. All it could do was to flop about in panic as it
sizzled and whistled and cried.
 'No!' Danlo whispered. 'No, no, no.'
  'This method causes the animal to release great amounts of
adrenalin before it's killed,' Hanuman explained. He sipped his
wine and then smiled sadly. 'Some say this makes the meat more
pungent. Certainly it's fresher, this way. Now let's see if the
sleekit is pregnant, or not.'
 The chef had his knives out, now, and he touched them to the
sleekit, whose sad, black eyes still burned with life. Then,
with startling efficiency, the chef plied his knives, slashing
and sawing and slicing, and the sleekit suddenly lay in pieces
that cooked in the hot oil and in its own blood. There was much
blood, most of which ran over the golden cooking surface and
into the gutters before draining down a dark hole at the
table's corner. Some of the blood, though, the chef used to
baste the liver and sweetbreads and the other cuts of meat. He
stirred in a decoction of the juice of snow dahlia and other
flowers, and in this way he made a delicious sauce. While the
meat simmered, he discarded the bones and intestines and other
offal. Danlo was glad to see that no baby sleekits spilled out
of the severed uterus, though clearly, some of the aficionados
were disappointed. When the chef's dish was finally finished,
he served it up on delicate white plates. He garnished the
steaming sleekit pieces with sliced oranges and fresh mint.
Then he bowed to the aficionados and began wiping his knives
with a soft white cloth.
 'An elegant dish,' Hanuman said. 'Though I should tell you,
I've never really liked the way sleekit tastes.'
 Danlo heard Hanuman's voice hissing out of the darkness, but
he could not look at him. He was sweating now, struggling to
breathe, and both his palms were pressed to his forehead. He
sat utterly still, fascinated and stunned by what he had just
seen.
 'You ... were right,' he said when he finally caught his
breath. 'I should not have stayed.'
637
 'But then you'd never have experienced the art of odori,'
Hanuman said. 'Didn't you tell me once that a human being can
never have enough experience?'
  'But the killing of a sleekit this way ... this is shaida.'
He stared at the candle lights hanging from the ceiling, and
he remembered: shaida is he who cuts meat from a living
animal.
 'I should have thought that you'd be gratified that some
civilized people spurn cultured meats in favour of the real
thing.'
 Danlo watched the aficionados eating their dinner, and then
for the first time in years, he said a prayer for the spirit of
a slain animal: 'Pela Churiyanima,' he whispered, 'mi alasharia
la shantih, o shantih l'Ali.'
 'Of course, it's cruel,' Hanuman said, 'but all killing is
cruel.'
Danlo looked at him and said, 'It is wrong to kill.'
 'But your Alaloi kill animals don't they? I should have
thought you'd be used to the sight of killing.'
  'A hunter never kills ... just for the pleasure of it,'
Danlo said. 'An Alaloi man kills to live, only because there is
no other way.'
  'Have you ever seen a cat play with a mouse?' Hanuman asked.
 'I have never seen a mouse, but I know about the snow
tigers,' Danlo admitted.
  Hanuman glanced over at the kitchen doors for a moment, then
said, 'You're sworn to ahimsa, Danlo, and I admire your
devotion. I honour it, even though I think it's slightly silly.
But you yourself admit that killing is a necessary part of
life. If that's so, why shouldn't we enjoy it? Why shouldn't we
praise the act and savour everything about it?'
  Danlo was about to answer him when another chef, a big woman
with meaty hands and a tight, grim face, emerged from the
kitchen. She pushed a steel-drawered cart right up to their
table. Danlo wanted to rise up and
638
 flee, then, but everyone in the restaurant seemed to be
watching him. While the chef grunted and panted and bent low to
ignite the burners beneath the table, Danlo told himself that
this art of frying live animals was just another of
civilization's decadences. The right side of him called out for
him to run away as fast as he could, but his left side
whispered that he should stay and learn from this decadence.
Like a seabird caught in the ocean's ice, he was frozen into
inaction. He watched the chef smear an orange-coloured oil
across the golden fry table. He realized that civilized people,
in their comfortable cafes and effortless getting of clothing,
warmth, and luxury, in the isolation of their professions, in
their acquisition of knowledge or money, in their easy
entertainments, were so benumbed and cut off from life that
they could see neither the world's horror nor its beauty. The
various drugs and art forms so common in the City were ways
toward a forced and artificial appreciation of beauty; the
abomination occurring before his eyes was an attempt of a jaded
people to experience – safely – sheer horror. Danlo hated
people for needing such stimulations. He was horrified to
discover that after seven years in Neverness, a part of himself
had grown too used to accepting their ways. In truth, at that
moment, the right side of him despised the left, even as his
belly churned and tightened at the smell of burning oil. He
watched the chef open a steel drawer packed with fresh snow.
When she removed a snowworm as long as his forearm and held it
up for him to see, he pressed his fist into the centre of his
belly. For the first time, he glimpsed a part of Hanuman's
vision of their world: that all people crave suffering as
instinctively and fiercely as they do joy.
 'This is shaida,' Danlo said. He leaned his head closer to
Hanuman's, and he whispered, Tell her we have changed our
minds.'
'Have we?' Hanuman said.
'Please tell her to stop.'
The table surface was now quite hot, and the chef held
639
the snowworm over it. The worm kept trying to coil onto itself;
it was only with difficulty that the chef managed to pull it
straight.
 'No, do not!' Danlo suddenly shouted. 'Don't you know that
aulii... has a rare sensitivity to heat?'
 But the chef did not listen to Danlo. He wasn't the first
newcomer to fall squeamish and lose his taste for his meal. The
restaurant's chefs had instructions to heed only the
aficionado's commands, and since Hanuman said nothing, the chef
dropped the worm onto the table.
'No!'
  There was a sudden sizzling sound, and in front of Danlo,
the worm bounced about and writhed in the hot grease. It tried
to coil, but the proteins in its segments were shortening-up,
congealing, cooking. Using the dull edge of her knife, the chef
rolled it back and forth across the frying surface. And it
never stopped writhing, and inside Danlo, his intestines and
stomach and oesophagus writhed and burned with bitter acids.
His eyes burned with tears, and his throat burned, and he
coughed and he said, 'Do not let it die this way! aulii's
nerves are buried ... so deep.'
  He was too choked-up with hatred to say more about the
snowworm's anatomy. He wanted to tell the chef that most
animals, when they burn to death, suffer pain only a short
while because the nerves most sensitive to heat are
concentrated in the skin and are quickly destroyed. He wanted
to tell Hanuman, and every aficionado in the restaurant, that
the snowworm's consciousness was different from that of other
animals. A snowworm's awareness of cold and heat – of
everything – was spread throughout every tissue and cell of its
body. A snowworm was fantastically sensitive to heat. It would
take a long time to die, writhing on the griddle, and each
moment of burning would last forever.
'Kill it now,' Danlo pleaded. 'Please, now.'
But the chef only smiled at him with her tight, thin lips,
640
 and she poured an amber liquid over the length of the worm.
The liquid – it was probably cognac or some other spirit of
alcohol – hissed and steamed. The chef used a little hand light
to ignite the liquid, and now the worm writhed inside a shroud
of hot blue flames.
 'Tell her to kill it,' Danlo said. He looked fiercely into
Hanuman's eyes for a moment, then back at the worm.
'I can't do that,' Hanuman said.
'Tell her!'
 'But that would be pointless. In a few seconds, she'll slice
the worm into segments, and it will be over.'
  'Not... over,' Danlo gasped out. 'You cannot kill a worm
that way. Each segment ... has its own life. The chef can slice
aulii onto your plate, but the parts will still be alive.'
 'That's the way this dish is eaten,' Hanuman said. There was
no emotion in his voice and nothing in his eyes except the
reflection of a worm writhing through blue flames.
'But first the worm must be killed!'
'I'm sure the chef doesn't know how.'
'It must be killed!' Danlo repeated.
'Then perhaps you should kill it.'
'I cannot,' Danlo said. 'You know I cannot.'
 'No, that would be an ignoble act,' Hanuman said. 'Out of
compassion for all living things, you've sworn never to harm
anything, not even a dying snowworm.'
  For what seemed a long time Danlo could not move. Then he
looked at the snowworm again, and his heart was suddenly on
fire. He fairly leaped out of his chair, leaned far over the
table, and he plunged his hands through the blue alcohol
flames. He grabbed the snowworm. As quickly as he could, he
squeezed one end of it between his forefinger and thumb, and
then, in the Alaloi way, he ran his fingers up and down the
worm, squeezing deeply, popping the nerve tube segment by
segment. When he was done, he dropped the worm in front of
Hanuman. He stood
641
holding his burned, greasy hands open in the air. 'What is
wrong with you!' he shouted at Hanuman.
  And Hanuman just smiled at him; he looked at the worm and
said, 'Now you understand.'
  And Danlo did understand, and the understanding was a pain
burning inside him more urgently than any pain he had ever
known. He fell deep into hatred then, hatred for Hanuman and
the bewildered aficionados, hatred for himself. His face was
like a burning mask of skin smothering and blinding him. He
leaned forward and grasped the edge of the table. It was
wrought of dense black wood and gold and it was shockingly
heavy, but with a single convulsion of muscles and popping
spine, Danlo straightened up and threw the table over. It
crashed to the floor. Wine goblets and plates and the table's
flower vase shattered, and shards of porcelain sprayed out into
the dark room. Without pause or thought, Danlo sprang over to
another table where a chef was frying some prawns, and he threw
that table down, too. And then he found a stew table where a
lobster was boiling inside a great clary kettle, and over it
went, and he didn't hear the screams of the aficionados
splashed with boiling water, couldn't see their outraged faces.
Two of the chefs tried to block his way and subdue him, but he
knocked them aside and ran from the room. He barely had enough
sense to grab his furs before rushing into the snowstorm that
blew through the streets outside.
  When he had lost himself in the dark, twisting glidderies of
the Bell, at last he stopped and gasped out, 'Oh, Hanu, Hanu,
why did I break my vow?'
 He looked into a street light, and there, tongued in the
pretty, coloured flames he saw an image of Hanuman's face
smiling at him. A part of him, on his right side, expected to
see Hanuman rushing from the restaurant to make his apologies.
But the left half of him whispered that he would never come. He
stood on a nameless street listening for the sound of skate
blades against ice. He felt the snow
642
 breaking and melting against his face, and he waited a long
time in silence before setting out toward the Old City. He had
to find a cafe before it grew too late; he was now very cold,
very weary, and very, very hungry.
643



CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

The Fire Sermon

Then The Awakened One, having dwelt in Uruvela as long as he
wished, proceeded on his wanderings in the direction of Gaya
Head, accompanied by a great congregation of priests, a
thousand in number, who had all of them aforetime been monks
with matted hair. And there in Gaya, on Gaya Head, The
Awakened One dwelt with the thousand priests.
   And there The Awakened One addressed the priests: –
   'All things, O priests, are on fire. And what, O priests,
are all these things which are on fire?
   'The eye, O priests, is on fire; forms are on fire;
eye-consciousness is on fire; impressions received by the eye
are on fire; and whatever sensation, pleasant, or
indifferent, originates in dependence on impressions received
by the eye, that too is on fire.'
 – from The Teachings of The Awakened One

 On the second day of deep winter, Bardo completed negotiations
on a cathedral in the Old City. It was indeed a glorious
building of sweeping arches and ancient stone. A sect of
Kristians, during the lordship of Jemmu Flowtow, had built it
near the Academy in the hope of attracting young novices to the
worship of a god-man they called the Messiah. But Kristianity
was a decrepit, tottering and sickly religion; its ancient
doctrines and rituals had as little vitality as a toothless old
man who has long since undergone his last return to youth. The
Kristians could not establish themselves on Neverness, and so
they had sold their
644
beautiful church and abandoned the City. Various investors and
owners, for thirteen centuries, had kept it in good repair.
Bardo acquired it from a group of Architects known as the
Universal Church of Ede. They, too, had abandoned Neverness,
and quite recently, not because their religion was dying, but
because they feared that the light from the Vild would soon
destroy the City. In fact, since they had owned the cathedral a
scant twenty years and had never made use of it, they were
desperate to sell it. And so Bardo paid much less money for it
than it was worth. To celebrate this mercantile victory – and
to prepare for the anniversary of Mallory Ringess' supposed
ascension to godhood – he declared a holiday. On the 19th of
deep winter, at the Ring of Fire, the Way of Ringess would hold
a mass joyance, the greatest gathering and party the City had
ever seen.
 All Are Welcome! – This was the message recorded on the
invitation disks that Bardo's followers distributed throughout
the four quarters of the City. Although no one knew how many
people might attend an outdoor joyance in the deeps of winter,
Bardo had chosen the largest of the City's ice rings to
accommodate the hoped-for crowds. Naturally, when Lord Ciceron
learned that thousands of the religiously curious would be
swarming into the ice ring nearest the Academy, he was irate.
But there was little he could do. Each of the City ice rings
was, by canon law, a commons; while the Order's zambonis
maintained every street and ring in the City (except the
illegal ones), keeping the ice clear and smooth, the Lords of
the Order could not forbid the people to gather upon them. Of
course, they could forbid all Ordermen to attend the joyance,
but Lord Ciceron perceived that such a forbiddance might be
disobeyed, and so he wisely restrained the Lords of the Tetrad
from issuing a formal injunction. In many ways, however, he
made it known that the Order disapproved of the joyance: he
refused to lend Bardo's church any of the Order's movable
warming pavilions; for fifteen days preceding the event, he
kept the zambonis away from the Ring of Fire
 645
 and its surrounding streets so that the ice throughout the
entire district would run to seed and become nearly impassable;
he peevishly announced that all the Order's restaurants and
multrums near the ice ring would be closed. It must have galled
him that Bardo thwarted each of these measures and turned
adversity to his advantage.
 The 19th of deep winter dawned clear and bitterly cold. The
sky was a perfect blue-black circle hung in silence over the
Ring of Fire. The ring itself – a circle of ice a quarter mile
in diameter – shone like a red mirror with the light of the sun
rising over the mountains. Around the rim of the ice ring were
many warming pavilions, great open tents of scarlet silk that
flapped and rippled in the wind. Bardo's followers had worked
through the night erecting them. Bardo had paid for the
pavilions with money collected from new Ringists, just as he
had paid for the kiosks and food pavilions that dotted the ice
ring. He had hired chefs from the City's best restaurants; from
the vendors in the Farsider's Quarter, he had bought vast
quantities of food and drink. As the morning wanned and the
first people ventured into the ring, the smells of roasting
sweetmeats and bread spread out from kiosk to kiosk. And
jambalaya and hot curries and fairy foods for those wishing to
gorge, and a hundred other dishes, and with each hour, more
people gathered together eating their steaming delicacies and
drinking coffee and chocolate and hot ale. By noon there were
three thousand people there. Then, from a wooden stage built
near the ring's southern rim, musicians began to play and the
sound of gosharps and booming drums could be heard across the
City. People began swarming into the streets leading to the
ring. Since the ice of these glidderies was rotten and in
places packed with snow, they had to eject their skate blades
and make their way by boot toward the joyance. Bardo eased
their impatience by having hundreds of new Ringists go among
them with billies full of beer and wine. He distributed other
drugs as well. Freely, from his own stores, he gave away
646
dried triya seeds and teonancatl mushrooms; he provided little
silk bags full of tobacco, toalache, bhang, and other plants
that might be smoked. To walk up the Serpentine, where it
curved around the northern rim of the ring, was to move slowly
through clouds of blue smoke, to see a hundred pipes glowing
red and orange, and to hear millions of the little triya seeds
popping as they burned and released psychedelic vapours into
the air. People everywhere were laughing and singing, and they
buoyed each other along in unbroken streams. Most of them, by
the time they entered the ice ring, were slightly drunk from
this smoke. And there they gathered shoulder to shoulder before
the stage as the music of the mantra musicians vibrated through
their bellies and up their spines. There were rich astriers
dressed in chukkas and capes; and ill-clad autists with their
bare, frozen feet; and wormrunners, aphasics, warrior-poets,
nimspinners and arhats; and many, many academicians bedraped in
their bright-coloured furs. Almost half the Ordermen in
Neverness were there, and they stood easily among the hibakusha
and the harijan and the other peoples of the City. Throughout
the afternoon they gathered, a great rippling swarm of humanity
(and even a few curious Darghinni and Fravashi) who never
stopped eating and singing and smoking and spinning and
dancing.
 'By God, there must be eighty thousand people here!' Bardo
said. He stood in the opening of a huge warming pavilion at the
rear of the stage. The mantra musicians had ceased playing, and
the stage was empty, which allowed a clear line of sight out
over the ice ring. He gazed at the sea of people swaying and
waiting below him, and he started to laugh. 'Perhaps as many as
ninety thousand – ah, this will be a night to remember!'
 At his right side stood Danlo, and on his left, Hanuman li
Tosh. Since the night in the restaurant they had not spoken to
each other; now there was a wall between them of little
politenesses, formalities, and anxious silence.
647
 Danlo, too, looked out over the manswarm, counting. It was
almost dark, but he could still see the people's black and
white and brown faces shining before him. At any moment, at
various points across the ice ring, little orange lights would
flare quickly before dying. They looked like hundreds of
fireflies winking on and off. But it was only the flames from
matches striking, he realized; in a crowd so vast, there would
always be a few people lighting their pipes.
  'I count... ninety-six thousand people,' Danlo said. He had
to shout against the roar of voices filling the ice ring. 'And
forty-nine aliens.'
  Bardo ahhhed and hmmmed, and he stroked his beard and seemed
very pleased. In his black fur gown and cape, which were
trimmed out in gold, he was an impressive figure of a man. All
the Ringists in the warming pavilion – Surya Lal and Thomas
Rane and the inner circle, as well as many godchildren serving
hot drinks and making important errands – looked to him to
orchestrate the evening's events. He smiled at Hanuman,
belched, then said, 'So many people – who's ever faced so many
before?'
  Hanuman was brazenly dressed in his formal cetic's robe;
atop his head was an orange satin toque. He hated wearing hats
of any sort, even on cold, windy nights. He wore it only for
camouflage. Beneath the floppy toque was a headgear of another
kind: a common cetic's heaume, a chromium cap of neurologics
that gleamed from his brows across his head to the back of his
neck. Or rather, it would have gleamed had he dared to take his
hat off.
  There are ninety-six thousand, three hundred and ninety-one
people here,' he said. His eyes were wide open, but blind with
the intensity of computer interface. The cetic's heaume
generated an intense field, suffusing his brain with
information. 'And even as we speak, more are arriving.'
 'It's time we started the testaments,' Bardo said. 'Before it
falls too cold.'
648
  Now Hanuman's eyes began to clear, and he scrutinized the
people below them. It was obvious to Danlo that he had faced
away from his computer, for the moment, and was now seeing with
the eyes of a cetic.
 'I should think we might open them more,' Hanuman said.
'With more music?' Bardo's voice boomed out.
 Hanuman nodded his head. 'However I'd dispense with the
improvisatori altogether and reschedule the song masters for a
later time. Now it would be best to call up the concertists.
They should play no more than a quarter hour.'
'And then the testaments?'
  'And then the testaments,' Hanuman said. 'But there should
be no more than five of them.'
 'Including my own?' Bardo asked. He frowned and stamped his
boots up and down on the wood with such vigour that the whole
stage vibrated and shook.
  'Your testament,' Hanuman said, 'will be incorporated as
part of the kalla ceremony. There should be five others.'
  'Danlo's testament, of course,' Bardo said after smiling at
Danlo. He held up a huge finger gloved in gold leather. 'And my
cousin's. And we mustn't overlook Thomas Rane. And I suppose we
should also include Jonathan Hur.'
 Hanuman shook his head. 'I would alternate the sexes. Thomas
Rane should speak first, and then Surya, followed by Danlo. And
then we should let Nirvelli give her testament. Have you heard
it yet? She has an elegant style, a powerful voice – as many of
the courtesans do.'
  'I wish that Tamara could have spoken,' Bardo said. 'But she
told me that she had an engagement tonight, too bad.'
  Just then, Danlo and Hanuman exchanged glances. They both
knew that Tamara had declined to attend the joyance because she
disliked Hanuman.
 'Someday we'll persuade Tamara to share her remembrances,'
Hanuman said. 'But tonight, Nirvelli will have to speak for the
courtesans.'
649
'You'll go last?' Bardo asked.
'That would be best.'
  'By God, I wish we could just follow the original schedule.'
 Hanuman smiled and said, 'When we composed the schedule, we
did so knowing we'd likely have to change it.'
 Bardo frowned again, and it was obvious that he was uneasy
with allowing Hanuman to help orchestrate the joyance. In
truth, Hanuman was the real architect of all that occurred that
evening. It was he who had suggested giving away drugs to the
people; he had arranged the Fravashi chants, the tone poems and
body musics that would open the manswarm to their words. He was
a master of nada yoga, the yoga of sound, and he had carefully
placed the sulki grids that filled the ice ring with symphonies
and drumsongs and whispers, with mystic tones that worked upon
the body and brain. He had ordered the lasers and the dish-like
moon lights and had overseen their installation around the
ring's circumference. He had interfaced all this machinery with
a master computer hidden under the stage, and then he himself
had interfaced this computer in order to control things. As a
cetic, he was sensitive to the slightest changes in people's
consciousness, and he could read their mood as easily as an
Alaloi hunter identifies bear tracks in the snow. He could
change this mood and consciousness. This manipulation of masses
of people was an unforgivable violation of his cetic ethics.
Danlo hated this skill of Hanuman's, even as he was fascinated
by it. He watched Hanuman smiling sweetly at Bardo, and he
suddenly knew that Hanuman was planning to betray him.
  'I'm worried,' Bardo said to Hanuman. He puffed out his fat
cheeks and let a lungful of steamy breath escape into the air.
'I'm worried that you'll compromise yourself. There are other
cetics out there. Surely they'll discern your hand in all
this.'
650
'Perhaps,' Hanuman said.
'Well, you'll be banished from the Order.'
'Is that the worst fate that might befall me?'
'Are you ready to leave the Order, then?'
 'Should I give my allegiance to the Order?' Hanuman asked.
'Or to the Way of Ringess?'
 'By God, I hope you don't blame me for forcing you to such a
decision!'
 'But I haven't been forced to do anything,' Hanuman said.
  'You know it's my hope,' Bardo said, 'that no one should
have to make this choice.'
 'And it's not an ignoble hope. I share it, too. Tonight's
joyance should bring the Order and the Way closer together.'
'Either that or it will ruin us,' Bardo said.
  'No,' Hanuman reassured him, 'there's no chance of that.'
 'Well, ruin or no, I'd hope that the people would never
forget the Way of Ringess.'
'After tonight, they won't forget,' Hanuman said.
  He turned his head to let his eyes meet Danlo's. His face,
Danlo saw, was cold and white and set with anticipation.
  Then Hanuman smiled and said, 'A hundred thousand people,
and none of them will forget what they hear and see tonight.'
 They went back into the warming pavilion while nine
concertists in heated clothing took the stage. The concertists
stood in a half-circle facing the dark swarm of people below
them and fingered the keys of their pralltrillers. A long, low,
thunderous music vibrated the ice ring. It was terrible to
hear. It emptied the mind of all thought and set the hearts of
thousands booming up through their brains. The trance concerto
continued for exactly a quarter of an hour. Then the
concertists put down their instruments and left the stage.
It had been agreed that the speakers that evening might
651
talk about any aspect of Ringism, so long as they spoke from
their hearts and kept their testaments short. Thomas Rane,
sleek and serious in his silver furs, was the first to take the
stage. As at any joyance, he delivered an account of the
remembrancing art, and he speculated upon the nature of the
Elder Eddas. He slighted the dangers of kalla while extolling
its virtues. Surya Surata Lal quickly followed him. From the
warming pavilion, Danlo watched her walk out almost to the edge
of the stage. The tiny woman coolly faced the people spread out
over the ice below her and talked of the essence of humanness,
and of her love and hate for her all-too-human body. She spoke
with a brutal honesty. All people, she said, lived their entire
lives in bondage to hunger, pain and lust. And above all, to
the fear of death. But there was a way to transcend the body
and achieve immortality. This was the Way of Ringess: to
sacrifice body and self in order to grow into godhood. All
people, she said, should open their hearts to Mallory Ringess'
tremendous and miraculous sacrifice; all people must die to
themselves if they would truly live; all people must take the
image of Mallory Ringess inside themselves, and cherish it as a
revelation of what they might become. When she was finished, it
was Danlo's turn. He walked out across the creaking stage, out
to where he could feel the roar of a hundred thousand voices
engulf him. Foolishly, he wore only his racing kamelaika and a
pair of black gloves. The wind whipped through his hair, and he
heard someone down in front of him shout out, 'It's Danlo the
Wild!' In truth, he was unaware of how wild he looked; his
senses and mind were concentrated upon what lay before him: the
dark air gushing over him in cold waves that shocked him down
to the bone; the hundred thousand pairs of eyes burning to meet
his eyes; the words that spilled from his lips and were carried
outward to each point within the ice ring and far beyond. As he
had told Bardo in his observatory, he had considered these
words well. He had polished them as clearly as words
652
could be polished. He spoke with a rare devotion to truth,
though if anyone had asked him, he probably would have said
that he spoke too freely, with much more playfulness and
passion than a civilized man should betray. When he had
finished telling of his great remembrance of the Elder Eddas,
he was sweating despite the cold. Sweating and shivering and
smiling as the people stamped their boots and cheered him. This
cheering grew to a roar that vibrated his groin and shocked his
lungs and drove burning needles of pain inside his ears. He had
never heard such an exhilarating and terrible sound before; he
had never imagined human beings could make such a sound.
 'You spoke well,' Bardo said to him when he returned to the
warming pavilion.
  Danlo nodded to him and then grabbed up his parka, fur hat
and a wind mask. He wanted to listen to the remaining
testaments as one of the people, and so he silently bowed to
Bardo and to Thomas Rane, and left the warming pavilion. He ran
down the steps at the rear of the stage. He walked along the
rim of the ice ring, into the edge of the manswarm. With a
black wind mask covering his face, no one recognized him as the
man who had just spoken to them of remembrance and the One
Memory. Slowly, brushing fur to fur past hundreds of people, he
made his way toward the centre of the ring. All about him were
the smells of bubbling cheeses, sweetmeats and bread mingled
with the thrilling aroma of toalache. And everywhere, the triya
seeds burning and popping, and the pungent skin greases worn
against the cold and the vapours of hot beer. Everyone seemed
excited. A few nimspinners, in their heated silks, danced about
ecstatically, but most people stood in their places, shifting
from boot to boot atop the packed, squeaking snow. They stood
facing the southern segment of the ring. Danlo could not help
thinking that no important ceremony should be made facing
south. One hundred thousand people faced the wrong way as they
chatted and conferred with each other and craned their
653
 necks toward the stage. Danlo was taller than most of them,
and he could clearly see Nirvelli as she stretched her arms
wide like a bird and spoke of the joy of remembrancing the
Elder Eddas. She was a lithe and beautiful woman with skin as
black as space, and she spoke of joy as a force that could
transform each individual, and whole civilizations, and
someday, farwhen, perhaps the entire universe. Her words fell
out of the night like pearls into blacking oil; they floated in
the air, these indestructible words that seemed to have neither
source nor direction. Danlo gazed at the stage, at Nirvelli's
distant figure, and the sound of her voice spilled out behind
him, below him, and all around.
 Everything is alive with joy, just sheer joy; creating joy is
the purpose of the universe.
  When it was Hanuman's turn to speak, the people near Danlo,
and all over the ice ring, fell silent. They could not have
known what was to come. Yet, they must have had some
presentiment of a great event, for when Hanuman took the stage,
every mouth was still and every eye rigid. Danlo, too, watched
in fascination as Hanuman stepped out to the stage's very edge.
In his flapping orange robes and intense manner, from a hundred
yards away, he seemed like a single flame alone against the
dark horizon. And then he threw back his head and lifted his
face to the heavens; he held his hands above him, and his voice
blazed out: 'He is watching us, now, at this moment, as we
stand beneath the stars he knew so well.'
  Danlo had wondered if Hanuman would recount his great
remembrance, and it soon became clear that he would speak of
nothing else, but only indirectly. His voice fell over Danlo
like a silvery, three-dimensional net of sound. The
twenty-three great, gleaming sulki grids around the ring
convolved echoes, reverberations and acoustic cues, rolling
these components together to produce a perfect holophonic
sound. Danlo perceived Hanuman's words as if Hanuman were
standing close by,
654
whispering them in his ear. Or shouting them at his heart. That
is the nature of this abused technology, to make it impossible
to distinguish simulated sounds and images from events
occurring in the real world. Each person in the ice ring that
night experienced Hanuman's words in a similar manner. And
almost each of them experienced his words uniquely. Around the
ring, mounted unobtrusively, were hundreds of computer eyes
that fixed on the people's faces and read them as they smiled
and gesticulated and moved about. The emotions and mindsets of
a hundred thousand people, moment by moment, were sorted and
coded into information. Hanuman had smuggled in a cetic
computer that made use of this information; he had been the
sole architect of a hideously complex program that tailored his
words according to the configuration of each person's face. Or
rather, it coloured his voice and intonation and stress
syllables, and coded these sounds into the sulki grids so that
each person was touched in a unique way. Thus everyone heard
the same sermon, yet for everyone it was slightly different.
This was a triumph of the cetic art. Danlo marvelled that
Hanuman could manipulate so many people in so many different
ways. (And it appalled him that Hanuman would do such a thing.)
He stood behind a fat wormrunner listening as Hanuman spoke of
the suffering and evil of the world, and he wondered what
murmurs and lamentations those around him were hearing. He
stepped closer to the stage, the better to listen, but
Hanuman's dreadful voice surrounded and followed him like a
cloud of buzzing flies, and did not change: 'And what is the
first thing that Mallory Ringess would see when he looks at us?
He would see, and he does see, that each of us is suffering;
each of us burns with the pain of pure being.'
 It occurred to Danlo that with the leather wind mask covering
his face, the computer eyes could not read him, and therefore
Hanuman's computer could not find the specific sound keys to
manipulate his mood. Perhaps he, of
655
all the maskless people around him, was the only one to hear
Hanuman's silver voice just as it really was.
  'All things are on fire,' Hanuman said, and his voice
sizzled in the air. 'Atoms are on fire, and electrons, and
nuclei stripped to plasma are on fire. The rocks in the
mountains are on fire. The air is on fire, and the ice of the
sea, and the stars, all the stars in all the galaxies across
the sky are on fire. The Vild stars are exploding into fire one
by one. And with what are these things on fire? They burn with
the fire of pure being; they are afire with pure consciousness,
the primeval urge to be, to organize into forms, to
interconnect with other forms, to evolve.'
  Danlo closed his eyes, the better to hear Hanuman's voice
more clearly. It was a marvellous voice, a powerful voice cut
with the inflections of thousands of other voices from other
times and other places. In this one, beautiful voice, he heard
the joy and menace of the warrior-poet, as well as the dreamy
tones of an autist. There was the nobility and command and
cruelty of Old Earth's war kings, the whining and the solemnity
of the priest, the singsong grandeur of a rabbi saying kaddish
for the dead. And farther back, to the forests and steppes of
Urasia, in Hanuman's pulsating vocal cords, he heard the
chanting and the drumbeat of the shaman. Every wisdom, artifice
and discovery of philosophy seemed to flow into Hanuman's voice
and strengthen it, charging it with an electric energy. There
was infinite subtlety in his words, the refinements of century
upon century of man communicating his visions to others. Yet,
despite all the evolution and art of the cetics, in the deepest
part of Hanuman's voice there vibrated a singular, primeval
sound. It was the howl of an animal crying out in hunger or
pain or sheer longing at the sight of the winter moon. It broke
from Hanuman's throat as it must have broken upon the grassy
veldt of Afarique a million years ago. All of history was only
an elaboration upon this single howl. Danlo listened as Hanuman
spoke on and on, and the howl intensified
656
 and deepened and wound back upon itself until it drew out high
and insistent, like the repetitive sob of a child crying for
his mother. This cry was buried in each of Hanuman's words;
perhaps it was buried in the chests and cells and atoms of a
hundred thousand people standing in the snow, and in all women
and men who had ever lived, or who ever would live, across all
the galaxies' stars and worlds. This long, dark, endless cry
from Hanuman's heart was terrible to hear, and the sound of it
burned like fire in Danlo's ears.
 'All the living things of the world are on fire,' Hanuman
said. The trees on the hillsides are on fire, and the bacteria
which are too small to see, and the snowworms, and the
sleekits, and the shagshay lambs crying for their mothers'
milk. The tigers in the forests at night – they burn so
brightly it wounds the eyes. You, who listen to these words
tonight, are on fire. I am on fire. And with what are we all on
fire? We burn with the fire of pure being; we are afire with
pure consciousness, the primeval urge to be, to organize
ourselves into new forms, to interconnect with other forms, to
evolve. We burn with the fire of passion for life, and with
pain, with fear, with birth, old age, and death. With hatred,
misery, sorrow, lamentation and suffering are we on fire. What
is humankind but a knot of flames burning with nostalgia for
the infinite? We burn with the urge to overcome ourselves and
with the terror of failing to evolve. We are afire with our
possibilities, with what we might become. With dread, with
longing, with despair are we on fire.'
  Here Hanuman dropped his hands to his sides and paused to
take a breath of air. And then he raised his hands again; he
held them out toward the ice ring as if beckoning, as if
conjuring some force that only he could see. Danlo could not
help staring at him; all around the ring, everyone was staring,
stamping their boots, breathing out their steamy breaths and
coughing at the cold air. Then Hanuman's flowing robes burst
into flames, and all at once the
657
 people across the ring let out a great cry. Hanuman's robes
burned as if soaked with sihu oil; smokeless orange flames shot
up and writhed about his body and limbs, completely enveloping
him. Danlo watched to see him gasp in pain, to see his skin
blacken and burst open in running red cracks. But, of course,
no such thing happened. Hanuman held his hands out and smiled
sadly – Danlo had exceptional eyes, and from a hundred yards
away he could see this smile of twisted compassion break across
his face. Hanuman remained untouched by the flames because
there were no flames, just light made and shaped by the sulki
grids into the image of flames. It was only an illusion, a
simulation of fire, though hardly less compelling for not being
real.
 'All things are on fire,' Hanuman said, 'and we are each of
us on fire, and everything tells us this is so. Our eyes are on
fire; whatever we see is on fire; eye-consciousness is on fire;
images received by the eye are on fire; and whatever sensation
or thought these images engender inside us, that too is on
fire.'
 Suddenly, at many points across the ring, many people seemed
to ignite into sheets of crimson fire. Flame tongues licked the
panicked face of an autist near Danlo, and passed to a
horologe, whose red robe was suddenly a shroud of fire burning
around him. Danlo counted a hundred of these human torches
before he gave up and concentrated on what Hanuman was saying.
 'And with what are our eyes on fire? With the fire of passion
for life, and with pain, with fear, with birth, old age and
death. With hatred, misery, sorrow, lamentation and suffering.
The whole of our being burns to behold our possibilities, and
what we might become. With dread, with longing, with terror,
with despair are we on fire.'
 Now many thousands of people were ablaze with illusory
flames. Many screamed in alarm; for a moment it seemed possible
there might be a riot and a stampede. But then scores of
harijan and nimspinners flung their arms
658
above their heads and danced about ecstatically, and the mood
of the manswarm segued from near-panic to mass fervour. In any
large gathering of people, there is always the intoxification
of the swarm, the surrendering of the individual's personality
to group consciousness. The people near Danlo ached to be part
of this consciousness; they longed to create this
consciousness, this higher identity, this incendiary religious
frenzy. And so they touched each other's garments, and they
watched each other as they clapped their hands and smiled and
swayed back and forth upon the hard-packed snow, and their
hundred thousand voices sang out as a single voice, a long,
dark roar that split the night like winter thunder. They let
their separate selves burn away like so many thousands of
matches, annihilating themselves in an all-consuming
transcendence. The ice ring was full of this fire that Hanuman
had made. And full of the other fire as well. Between Danlo and
the stage where Hanuman stood was a roiling wall of chrome-red
fire. Had it been a real fire of hot, glowing gases, no one
could have seen through it. But the fire was only of light and
evanescence, and everywhere Danlo looked, he saw men and women
dancing or shaking or staring up at Hanuman. Their eyes burned
with dread and longing and terror, but their faces were now
blazing with an emotion that was the opposite of despair.
 Hanuman held his flaming hands out toward Danlo and the other
people, and he motioned for silence. 'It is said that there is
a way to be freed from this burning. If our eyes are afire, we
should cover them with damp cloths. If our ears burn, we should
stop them with wax. We should conceive an aversion for images,
and sounds, and smells, and tastes, and information, and for
all things that might touch our body or that we might touch. It
is said that we must renounce sensations, and whatever thoughts
or ideas these sensations engender in our minds. We must
conceive an aversion to mind-consciousness, and to the mind
itself. For all the things of the world we must conceive an
659
 aversion lest we become attached to them and to our burning
for them. It is said that in this renunciation we may become
divested of passion, and by the absence of passion we become
free, and thus we become aware that we are free, and then there
is nothing in life that can cause us to suffer and burn.'
 As he said this, the flames flowing around him seemed to take
on a hotter, bluer colour. He moved about the stage in an
intensely kinetic manner, gesturing and twisting and beckoning
as if a real fire were burning him, from without and within. At
times he would stand perfectly still, posing as one possessed
by a vast energy. And then he would move again and give voice
to his passions, and everything about him was alive, compelling
and fey.
  'It is said that you should renounce all things in order to
quench the fire in yourselves, but this is the way of a
vegetable or a buddha or a stone, not a human being. A true
human being burns to be more, and as long as you burn, you
belong to life. This is also said: you must consume yourself in
your own flame; how could you wish to become new unless you had
first become ashes? This is what I've remembered and what I've
felt and what I've seen: whoever would shine brightest must
endure burning. For a true human being, there is no other way.'
  Across the ice ring, fairy flames of cobalt and blue jumped
from garment to garment, from person to person. Then the flames
at last reached Danlo, and he too seemed to catch fire. Flames
leaped from his furs, from his eyes, from his wild hair, and
crackled along his white feather. Almost all the people in the
ice ring were now burning with this single, deep blue fire.
Each man and woman is a star.
  These words were very close to Danlo, as near as the
arteries throbbing in his ears. His whole body was aflame with
brilliant blue fire. He held up his blazing hands before his
eyes, and he marvelled that the fire had no heat to it and
could not really touch him. Despite the flames, the air
660
 surrounding him was still frigid, and his fingertips and toes
burned not with fire, but with bitter cold.
 'Each man and woman is a star!' Hanuman called out. The
flames falling over him suddenly billowed out in a ball of
cobalt fire and light. 'Starfire is the hottest fire, the pure
fire, the refining fire that would burn away the weakest and
most ignoble parts of ourselves. Whoever would give light must
endure burning. We must burn for a higher organization of our
beings, burn for more and deeper consciousness, burn for more
life. We must each consume ourselves in our own flames. Only
then will a vaster self be born who is a master of fire. Only
then will the burning for the infinite lights be understood.
Only then can a true human being become himself. Only then can
a god let birth, old age and death burn away and be no more.
 'I must speak to you of the god within each of us. This god
is lord of fire and light. This god is fire and light, and is
nothing but fire and light. Each of us is this god. Each man
and woman is a star that burns on and on with infinite
possibilities. I must speak tonight of becoming this star, this
eternal and infinite flame. Only by becoming fire will you ever
be free from burning. Only by becoming fire will you become
free of pain, free of fear, free of hatred, sorrow,
lamentation, suffering and despair. This is the way of the
gods. This is the way of the Ringess, to burn with the fire of
a new being, to shine with a new consciousness as bright as all
the stars, as vast and perfect and indestructible as all the
universe. This is the way of Mallory Ringess, who watches over
all the people in the City where he was once as human as you
and I.'
  When Hanuman had finished speaking, he stood with his hands
held out over the peoples' heads, as in a formal blessing, then
he swept his arms up toward the sky. He was at once exhausted
and exultant, panting and sweating and shivering in the cold.
He burned and twisted inside a sphere of blue fire that filled
the whole of the ice ring. The kiosks were on fire, and the
food tables, and the mugs of
661
 foamy black beer, and the toalache pipes, and the multrum
stalls, and the warming pavilions, and the ice beneath the
people's boots – all and everything blazed with bluish flames.
The air itself was on fire. And then this fireball exploded
upward into the night. Hanuman looked up, and Danlo, and all at
once a hundred thousand heads snapped back upon their necks.
Flames of violet and indigo shot high above the ice ring. A
column of fire swelled and blazed and streamed from ice to sky.
Flames of crimson, copper and orchid pink leaped from man to
woman and fed the vast fiery column pushing its way upward
above them. All at once, the people near Danlo gasped and cried
out with a single, great, bellowing voice. Danlo, too, was
caught up in the brilliance of the moment, swept up with topaz
flames, connected to this spectacular event despite all his
doubts. He hadn't known that Hanuman had programmed his
computers to generate such a compelling illusion; he had never
guessed such a thing was possible. He held his hand shielding
his eyes as he looked up. The flame column was now a quarter
mile wide and seemed almost as high as the peaks of the
mountains. Blazing streamers of orange and green and iron red –
and every other colour – disappeared into the sky. It seemed
that there was no limit to this upward rush of fire, that it
might burn hotter and brighter and ignite all the atmosphere.
But there was indeed a limit. The sulki grids, which Bardo had
leased from a renegade phantast, could cast their illusions
only so far. Ten thousand feet above the City the flames died
into the night, a limit to this sophisticated technology that
Hanuman li Tosh apparently could not accept. As all would soon
see, he sought to manufacture an even greater illusion, or
rather, a mass illumination that no one would ever forget.
Suddenly, the flames went out. There was only darkness in the
sky. To Danlo's eyes, and to a hundred thousand pairs of eyes
dazzled by fire, the people and the bright pavilions and all
the other features of the ice ring were suddenly lost in a sea
of vibrating blackness. And
662
then there was light, again, an instant surge of blinding
lights that stabbed into Danlo's brain and made him fling his
arm over his face. Around the rim of the ice ring, the
moonlights had come on. Hanuman had ordered this so, and the
moonlights and the lasers beamed great rivers of light up over
the ice ring and high above the City. The hundreds of
incandescent beams touched and wove together in a luminous dome
that filled the sky. Photons burned through the air and were
scattered and reflected by tiny ice crystals high in the
atmosphere. Through the atmosphere, above all ice and air. The
moonlights blazed up fifty miles above the planet and
illuminated the microorganisms and ionized gases of the Golden
Ring. A shower of light fell across the sky; it framed the ice
ring and much of the heavens above the City, this shimmering,
golden cathedral of light.
Hanu, Hanu, why have you betrayed yourself?
 Danlo stood gazing upward at the splendid lights as he
wondered about everything that Hanuman had said and done. In
truth, Hanuman had betrayed Bardo and the Way of Ringess, for
they had planned to loom the moonlights only at the end of the
joyance, when Bardo led the kalla ceremony.
Only by becoming fire will you ever be free from burning.
  Danlo was suddenly very aware of his hot breath stifling him
beneath his wind mask, so he pulled the sodden piece of leather
away from his face. No one noticed him, or recognized him as
the son of Mallory Ringess. The eyes of all around him were
held up toward the lights in the sky. Thousands of boots
crunched against snow; the air was broken with moans and coughs
and muffled cries. A gasp deeper than the wind rushed from ten
thousand lips all at once and blew across the ice ring. How
many people, Danlo wondered, would believe what Hanuman had
told them? How many would look up at the golden sky and open
themselves to what Hanuman had said was the truth?
663
Each man and woman is a star.
 There was a man, standing near Danlo, an itinerant cantor of
the Order dressed all in grey. His face was as thin as cut ice,
and it bore the tired and wary look of one who has seen all
there is to see. The collar of his travelling robe was
embroidered with the blazons of many planets: Yarkona, Solsken,
Alumit, Arcite and other places where he had taught his art of
pure mathematics. Clearly, he was a gypsy scholar who had never
attained his mastership; like all his kind, he was doomed to
wander the planets of the Civilized Worlds, teaching at the
Order's elite schools and dreaming of the day when he might
return to Neverness. And at last he had returned, not in
triumph as a master, but as a pilgrim on sabbatical seeking the
holy city of his youth. At first sight, he seemed still a
youth, with his creamy, unlined skin and his aching awareness
of his muscular pose. But he was far from being young, as Danlo
could clearly see. His eyes glowed bright purple with the light
of luminescent bacteria colonies implanted in his irises. This
was a look fashionable a hundred years ago, but now considered
quite gauche. This poor, outworn man's flesh had recently been
restored, his bulky new muscles regrown under the pull of
artificially induced gravities. He was clumsy and uneasy in his
new body and everything about his posture bespoke old habits,
hardened reflexes, the armouring of body and mind built up over
two lifetimes of suffering. That he suffered, anyone might have
noticed. He suffered from his bitterness and disappointment
with life. He was afire with every kind of sorrow, lamentation
and despair. His was the agony of lost love and broken dreams
and hatred of all the hurts and inanities of all the worlds he
had known. And yet, even this empty, eggshell of a man stood
beneath the lights that Hanuman made, and his face came alive
with a golden radiance. He was far too proud to fall into
exaltation, and yet the lights in the sky touched him and
quickened his whole being, and perhaps caused him to wonder if
all the
664
 secrets and possibilities of the universe might still be
within his grasp.
Each man and woman is a star.
 If a cynical, old Orderman could look up at the sky and burn
to become something new, then what of all the others?
Everywhere Danlo looked, the faces of the man-swarm were bright
with wonder and hope: one hundred thousand faces afire with
longing, with the overwhelming need to be released from their
suffering. Hanuman had told them that if only they endured the
holy fire long enough, they might be freed from burning. They
might become pure fire and light, and be free to create their
own possibilities.
Each man and woman is a star.
  Danlo pushed closer to the stage, past musty hats and the
smells of perfume, sweat and excitement. He squeezed by
awestruck women staring at the sky. He, himself, had eyes only
for Hanuman, and he sought him out where he stood at the edge
of the stage. Hanuman, though, was still frozen like a statue
with his arms raised and his head thrown back. His eyes were
closed and his face twisted as if he had fallen into a deep
ecstasy. Or deeper into the fire that can never be quenched.
 'Hanu, Hanu,' Danlo whispered, 'why couldn't you tell them
the truth?'
Each man and woman is a star.
  In truth, all things burned with a unique life, and just as
human beings suffered more than did the snowworms or stones,
the pain of the gods was infinitely greater than any man or
woman could ever know. The whole universe burned with pain,
from the Pavo Indus to the Ursa Major Cloud of galaxies. No
god, however brilliant or vast, could ever escape this pain,
and Danlo wanted to tell Hanuman this. He wanted to tell
Hanuman, and tell everyone, that, yes, they could become gods,
if this was their genius, if this was their fate, but only the
cool and timeless depths of Elder Eddas could ever heal them of
their suffering. But
665
 he no longer had the stage, and his moment for speaking the
truth was past.
 After a while, Hanuman opened his eyes and smiled as the
people let loose a tremendous cheer. The whole ice ring shook
with the sound of it. Hanuman returned to the warming pavilion
then. The moonlights were still gleaming when a furious Bardo
stamped across the stage and gave his testament, and then
guided the dazzled swarms through a mass (and false) kalla
ceremony. Cadres of newer Ringists, acting as guides,
distributed jiggers of sea water in the thousands. (It should
be noted that Jonathan Hur went among the people in secret,
passing out slip tubes of real kalla to anyone who sought the
Elder Eddas. The kalla fellowship – and many, many others –
soon gathered near the stage and lost themselves in true
remembrance.) The salty water was drunk, ritually,
mechanically. It was affirmed that Mallory Ringess became a
real god and would one day return to Neverness. It was revealed
that he had given humankind the secrets of the Elder Eddas in
order to guide all the race into godhood. It was repeated that
human beings could become as gods if, and only if, they would
follow the Way of the Ringess. Next to the marvels that Hanuman
had wrought, the ceremony seemed hollow and meaningless. The
people sipped their water and made their professions of faith,
and all the while they stood beneath the golden sky, and their
eyes glowed with the heavenly lights, and wonder was written
across their faces. When the ceremony was finally finished,
they began talking among themselves, in whispers and hoarse
voices and relieved laughter, tens of thousands of sudden
little conversations. Many were sceptical of all they had seen
during the joyance; many regretted losing their time and
freezing their faces in such a cold, windy place. They left the
ice ring quickly. But of all who remained to be with each other
and drink hot beer that night, it was agreed that the joyance
was a great success, that Hanuman li Tosh was a very great man,
and most importantly,
666
that each of the thousands of women and men spread out over the
ice ring did indeed burn with the fire of the stars.
667



CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

The Pearl

 My womb is memory; in that I place the seed. all created
things are born. Everything born, Arjuna, comes from the
womb of memory, and I am the seed-giving father.
 – from The Bhagavad Gita

 Looking backward at the turbid flow of history (or looking
forward into the evolution of human and artificial life within
the galaxy) Hanuman's Fire Sermon can be seen as a signal
event. It was the moment when the religion of Ringism announced
itself to the universe. Its effect upon the Order was immediate
and profound: in the early days of deep winter in the year
2953, many professionals and academicians began attending
joyances inside the cathedral that Bardo had bought. Many
embraced what would come to be called the three pillars of
Ringism: that Mallory Ringess became a real god and would one
day return to Neverness; that he had given humanity the secrets
of the Elder Eddas in order to guide all the race into godhood;
and that human beings could become as gods if, and only if,
they would follow the Way of the Ringess. Quite a few prominent
masters and lords – Kolenya Mor, Hugh wi Siri Sarkisian, Jonath
Parsons, Daru Penhallegon and others – entered the nave of the
cathedral and knelt on the cold stone floor as they made their
professions of faith, along with hundreds of new godlings from
across the City. Just thirty years previously, during the
lordship of the Timekeeper, the Order never would have
668

tolerated this kind of religiosity among its members. To keep
order within the stone buildings of the Academy, lords and
masters would have been debased, journeymen chastised, and
novices forbidden to take vows. But the Timekeeper was nineteen
years dead, and a war had been fought among the pilots; now
there was divisiveness within the College of Lords. No one
really ruled the Order. The four lords of the Tetrad, as a
whole, never gained the kind of total power that the Timekeeper
had wielded. And they never really functioned as a whole.
Chanoth Chen Ciceron railed against Ringism and Ringists while
the quiet-spoken Nikolos the Elder advised restraint. Mariam
Erendira Vasquez, perhaps guilty at having denied Danlo's
petition to save the Alaloi, was quite taken by the stories of
his great remembrance. Quite openly, she championed the
exploration of the Elder Eddas, if only by using the
traditional techniques of the remembrancers, and not through
Thomas Rane's kalla ceremonies. And as for the mysterious Lord
Pall, no one could tell whether he wanted to destroy the new
religion or merely subvert it.
 On the 34th of deep winter, at an open convocation of the
Lords' College, Chanoth Chen Ciceron scolded Lord Pall for
allowing the most brilliant of his journeymen cetics to fall
into collusion with the demagogue-prophet of a new religion.
The Lord Pall must explain to us why Hanuman li Tosh hasn't
been chastised for violating his ethics. The Lord Pall must
explain why Hanuman li Tosh has been allowed contact with the
renegade pilot known as "the Bardo".'
 But, of course, Lord Pall did not have to explain anything,
especially not to Chanoth Chen Ciceron, whom he must have
regarded as the most obnoxious of his rivals for power. Lord
Pall rubbed his pinkish, albino eyes and stood to address the
lords. In his cetic's hand language, he made swift little signs
that his translator interpreted to mean: The Lord Ciceron's
talents are much too elevated to waste concerning himself with
a journeyman cetic. I shall deal
669
with Hanuman li Tosh as he must be dealt with. It's true that
all religions are dangerous, but we shouldn't think that we
can't control this little religion of Bardo's. We shouldn't
worry that we'll let the Way of Ringess, whatever that is,
polarize our eternal Order.'
 But the Way of Ringess had already begun to polarize the
Order. Or rather, its radical expansion was the final cause
among many historical causes dividing the Order in two.
Already, at the time Danlo had come to Neverness, hundreds of
professionals had volunteered for the Vild mission because they
hated the work of religions and their gods: they regarded the
Vild, the light-years of exploded stars and ruined space, as
the tragic work of a religious group who worshipped a god
called Ede. They were sick of religiosity in all its forms,
just as they were sick of the Order's omnipresent and stifling
holism. They wanted to flee Neverness on a mission of freedom
and deliverance, and now that their fellow Ordermen in Upplysa
and Lara Sig and the other colleges were worshipping Mallory
Ringess as a god, their desire to flee this madness became both
a panic and a crusade. Others, those who had drunk kalla or
listened to Hanuman's sermon, saw Ringism as a fresh and fiery
wind that might blow away centuries of stale thoughtways and
dogmas, those outworn ways of viewing the universe that, like a
mechanic's equations chiselled into stone, had long been
reified into the Order's most venerable institutions. They told
each other that this brilliant stellar wind would breathe new
life into their fellows and into their City. Although they must
have worried that Ringism's growing fervour might sweep them
away like so many cinders into the night, they reasoned that if
only they could be a part of Ringism from its very beginning,
then they might control this explosive movement. They were the
elite of an elite Order, and they thought to control the
malcontents and madmen who always swarm to the light of a new
religion. That Hanuman li Tosh was one of this elite was their
hope and pride. They listened too well
670
 to his clever words, and they didn't foresee that their
adulation of him would eventually ruin the Order.
 Of course, most of those who lionized Hanuman were not of the
Order. They were hibakusha or harijan or autists from the
poorest streets of the City. They were arhats and infolaters
and princesses: Surya Surata Lal, after Hanuman's sermon, began
calling him 'The Agni', which means The Burning One' or 'Lord
of Fire', and other devoted Ringists addressed him in that
manner, too. His popularity waxed so quickly that it amazed
everyone, especially Bardo, who was very jealous of Hanuman's
rising star. He was more than jealous; he was wounded and wrath
with Hanuman for betraying him at the great joyance. 'By God
I'll never invite him to another joyance!' a swollen-faced
Bardo said to Danlo a few days later. 'I'll banish him from our
goddamn church!' He might have done just that, but for all his
bluster, he found Hanuman much too valuable to cast aside like
a bloodfruit that had been sucked dry. Thousands of godlings
flocked to Bardo's newly opened cathedral, and Bardo was sober
enough – if outraged – to perceive that they came to listen to
Hanuman and not to him.
 Most of those who followed the Way hoped to gain something
for themselves, whether godhood, enlightenment, mass communion
or remembrance. A few people, however, became Ringists solely
because they wanted to give of their talents and themselves.
Tamara Ten Ashtoreth was one of these few. It was her conceit
to infuse the Way of Ringess with the ancient secrets of the
Tantra that she knew so well. She clearly saw, after the night
that Hanuman delivered his Fire Sermon, that the religion of
Ringism was like a sacred, golden tree that might grow in any
one of several different directions. As Hanuman had prophesied,
it might indeed grow toward the fire of the stars, out into the
universe's infinite lights. Tamara also saw that this tree of
humanity would be made up of millions of people in their
all-too-human bodies. She believed – this
671
 was her heart's great passion – that human bodies must be
nourished as often as possible with the elixir of pure sexual
energy, or else they would never come truly alive. And so her
purity of heart impelled her to give herself to the Way of
Ringess. However, as Danlo discovered during the coldest days
of deep winter, she was a complex woman who had many reasons
for doing the things that she did. It was Danlo's pleasure to
spend as many evenings and nights with Tamara as he could.
These nights were always too few. Usually, in fulfilment of her
professional duties, Tamara would sally out on a bitterly cold
night to keep her appointments with other men (or women), quite
often with the most prominent lords and masters of the Order.
Danlo might have been jealous of this time lost to him, but he
was not by nature a jealous man. Then, too, his early
experience among the Devaki had trained him away from jealousy.
The Devaki – all the Alaloi – are the most promiscuous and
tolerant of peoples, at least until they make their marriages.
Danlo still believed that it was unseemly for an unmarried man
to be jealous of an unmarried woman. Therefore, on those nights
Tamara kept free, he would visit her at her house in the
Pilots' Quarter, and he was always glad for the marvellous
gifts that she gave him. He loved being alone with her in her
house, which stood on a quiet street on the cliffs above North
Beach. It was a small chalet of stone and naked shatterwood
floors, quite austere – not at all the kind of house he would
have imagined a courtesan would keep. But Tamara always met her
appointments down in the Farsider's Quarter, where her Society
maintained the grandest of the City's pleasure domes. Because
she never invited men to her house, she had no need to please
anyone but herself, and what pleased her was not dark luxuries
or rich furnishings but open windows and flowering plants and
floors of rare inlaid woods that she liked to dance upon,
barefoot, in the style of the best Sufi dancers. Indeed, she
liked to go about her house bare of any clothing at all. She
could do this
672
 without fear of tantalizing her neighbours because the houses
on either side of hers were kept by pilots who had been off
exploring the Vild for as long as she had lived there. In her
meditation room, on plain cotton cushions, she would sit naked
in front of the sliding windows, looking out at the sea cliffs
and the frozen waters of Neverness Sound far below. To
accommodate her need for nakedness, she usually kept her house
rather warm. On those nights Danlo came to visit, it was always
more than warm. Tamara's fireroom had two fireplaces, one on
either side of the room, and she would set logs blazing in both
of them before inviting Danlo to lie with her on a shagshay fur
on the middle of the floor. There, in the light of the fires,
she would take him through the positions of her sexual yoga.
Quite often, they would begin with him sitting crosslegged on
the fur in the Tortoise or Lotus position while she sat astride
him. They would breathe together as they joined, muscles
straining, skin gleaming, and sweating, always sweating in
salty, pungent rivers that ran down the hollows of their backs.
As she had told him, more than once, it was important to raise
the body's heat so that he sweated freely.
  One night, after a session of particularly fierce love play,
Danlo lay back against the furs to catch his breath. His hair
was a sodden mass of black clumps stuck to his dripping face
and neck. 'I am dying ... of the heat,' he said. 'Couldn't we
open a window?'
  'Have we finished?' Tamara sat near him, looking down at
him, and streams of sweat ran between her wide, heavy breasts
and flowed down her belly into her navel. The golden hair
between her legs was thick with moisture, and her whole body
glistened like cream. She used her fingers to comb her long,
wet hair away from her face while she evened her breathing,
then smiled at him and said, 'If we've finished, why don't we
go into the tea room and take our refreshments?'
They dried themselves with towels then, and put on
673
 kimonos of black silk. They went into the tea room, which
adjoined the meditation room. It was much cooler there. Danlo
always liked the feel of the tea room, with its rosewood beams,
paper walls and clean, good smells. It was starkly decorated,
but Tamara was an aficionado of beautiful things, and the few
objects to be seen impressed him with their beauty: the
porcelain tea service set out on a low table; a shatterwood
doffala sculpture of a bear that had been carved by a man of
one of the Alaloi tribes; and, arrayed atop the sill of the
sliding windows, seven oiled stones that she had found on the
beach. He sat between the table and the window, and he turned
to admire these stones. The window was cracked open, letting in
streams of cold sea air. Below him, below the cliffs he
sometimes liked to climb, was the Starnbergersee, frozen and
quiet with the cold of deep winter.
'Would you like tea or coffee?' Tamara asked.
'Tea, please. Peppermint, if you have any.'
  Tamara went into her kitchen to prepare their little meal.
Hers was one of the few houses in the City to have a kitchen.
Most people considered taking meals alone in one's own house to
be a barbaric, most unsocial act, but she was a courtesan,
after all, and she found it difficult to dine in public
restaurants. After a while, she re-entered the tea room
carrying a tray laden with a tea pot, silver knives and spoons,
a small bowl of honey and a larger bowl, full of bloodfruits
and tangerines. She set the tray on the table and sat across
from Danlo. She poured the steaming, golden tea into their
little blue cups and she served him with the precise and
graceful movements that the courtesans are taught when they
first learn their art.
  Danlo took a sip of the scalding tea while his eyes followed
her long, lovely hands. 'I love watching you,' he said. The way
you move.'
 She smiled at this compliment the way she always did, then
used her long fingernail to slice open the skin of a tangerine.
She peeled it with exquisite care, in a most pecu-
674
liar manner: she pulled the skin away from the meat in a
single, long, twisting strip, around and around the tangerine
from north pole to south. When she was finished, she gave it to
Danlo, who held the ends of the spiral strip between his
fingers and played with it, pulling up and down, letting the
peel uncoil and then coil again as if it were a bouncy orange
spring. He marvelled at the care she took in accomplishing
little things. He loved the way she poured tea into the exact
centre of the cup, the way she meditated on the golden stream
as it arched out of the teapot. Everything seemed to delight
her. She seemed intensely interested in spoons or teacups, or
in the clear articulation of her words as she searched his face
and spoke to him. She paid attention to everything that
happened around her, and she paid attention to him as no one
had ever done. This was her grace and her gift, to pay
attention. The whole of her art was to know people intimately
and help them awaken into joy. She wanted to be the bearer of
joy, to spread it among the people she knew, just as she used a
silver knife to spread honey over each of the tangerine
sections before putting them into Danlo's mouth. It was her
deep desire to let her awareness spread out and encompass every
rock and snowflake in the world, to take joy in everything, and
in every act, whether it be the washing of dishes or polishing
stones or joining with Danlo in slow, sweaty ecstasy. 'Ecstasy
lies in details,' she told him one night. It was her pride to
bring him to a greater ecstasy of life, and so she ate
tangerines with him and talked about little things, and she
listened as only a courtesan can.
 'I love watching the way you move,' she said to him as she
tore apart two sections of a tangerine. The fluidness – it must
come from growing up in the wild. Civilized men move as if
they're made of metal.'
'Have you taught many men ... how to move?'
  'I've tried,' she said. 'But the men of your Order are so
stiff and brittle.'
'I cannot believe you have not had your successes.'
675
 She bowed her head and smiled in false modesty. 'No one is
unteachable,' she said.
 Danlo wiped a drop of tangerine juice from his lip and said,
'You like teaching people things, yes?'
'Some people,' she admitted.
 'I have wondered ... if it is your intention to teach your
art to the Ringists.'
'Do you think I should?'
  Danlo ate another section of tangerine, then took a sip of
tea. The cold-hot mint tea brought out the fruit's acidity and
quite succeeded in waking up the taste buds along his tongue.
'I have wondered why you take such an interest in the Way. I
have wondered why any of us have. You want to wake people up –
you have said that before. The cells of our bodies, to wake
them up so that we can live ... as true human beings. But this
does not accord very well with the third pillar, does it?'
  Tamara took a bite of tangerine and smiled. 'Which is the
third pillar? I keep forgetting.'
  ' "That human beings can become as gods if, and only if,
they will follow the way of the Ringess",' he quoted.
  'But don't you think we should become fully human before we
go off becoming gods?'
'Does it matter ... what I think?'
'It matters very much.'
'Then I think that you should teach your art to Ringists,' he
said. 'You were born to teach these things, yes?'
  She nodded her head, then she picked up a bloodfruit and
examined it as if it were a diamond and she were looking for
the perfect way to cut it. 'Even when I was a little girl,' she
said, 'I wanted to be a courtesan. Of course, so many do, and
so many are turned away, but I always had a sense that this was
my calling, that I'd be very unhappy if I were turned away,
too.'
  Danlo smiled at her and said, 'But how could they have
turned you away? You are the most beautiful person I have ever
known.'
676
  For a while she laughed easily with a rich, musical
laughter. Then her face fell serious and she said, 'You know
it's thoughtless of you to flatter me as you do. I've always
been much too vain.'
  In truth, she was quite vain, and she hated being so, even
though she tried to accept this part of herself in a graceful
and natural manner, as she did everything else.
'You are what you are,' he said.
 'And you're not completely glad that I do what I do, are
you?'
'It limits certain possibilities between us,' he admitted.
'Are you speaking of marriage again?'
  He nodded his head. 'Marriage, yes, but not just that. The
making of a family ... a true union.'
'Is that so important to you?'
  'In the end, it is everything,' he said. He turned and
pressed his forehead to the cold window before saying, 'Ever
since I came to the City, I have lived ... for myself. My
quests, my misfortunes, my dreams. This is the civilized way.
So many here do the same. Even the professionals and pilots. We
are supposed to give ourselves to the Order, yes? We crave this
giving. To sacrifice a part of our lives for a greater life ...
as part of something greater than ourselves. Everyone knows
this. This is the ideal, but few achieve it, I think. The Order
is dead – everyone is saying this – and so we turn to the Way
to fill the hollowness. But it cannot be filled by crowding
elbow to elbow into a cathedral. Or by kneeling together while
Bardo gives us a taste of sea water. At least, I cannot ...
fill myself this way. I would be glad to leave the City
forever, if it were not for you. What we could make together.
Call it marriage or union, it does not matter. It would be
something splendid. Blessed. It is what we were meant for. I
see that now. I was blind for so long. When my tribe died ... I
died. A part of me. But now – I never dreamed that anyone like
you existed. Now, these nights here, I am alive again. For the
first time in a long time, I think I am truly sane.'
677
 He finished talking, and he slid open the window to let in
some fresh air. The night was cold and clear; far below, the
frozen waves of the Sound sparkled in the starlight. And beyond
the Sound, the mountains rose up and loomed upon the horizon
like dark, ancient gods.
 Tamara came over to him and knelt by his side. Despite the
serious lines of her face, her eyes were sparkling. She touched
his hand with her fingers, and she said, 'You're a beautiful
man and you always speak so beautifully. But is it fair to
speak of marriage when you're forbidden to marry?'
  He turned his head and looked at her. 'I am still a
journeyman – I have not taken my pilot's vows.'
  'But you will soon, won't you? They'll forbid you to marry,
and then you'll be chosen for the Vild mission, and we'll have
to say farewell because you'll be gone forever.'
'Not ... forever.'
'Would you return to Neverness?'
  'As soon as I could. As soon as I find a cure for the
plague. If there is a cure.'
'I understand – you have to complete your quest.'
 He shrugged his shoulders, a habit he had acquired only since
his admission to Resa. 'You could call it a quest, if you would
like.'
 'You'll complete your quest, and heal your Alaloi, of course.
And then? What would we have become? I've heard the stories of
women who wait for pilots to return.'
 'Do you mean the problem of the time distortions?' he asked.
 'I've heard of pilots that age three years to their
paramour's thirty.'
 'Those are Einsteinian distortions,' he said. 'Sometimes,
they are offset by the distortions of the manifold.'
 She looked at him and said, 'Slowtime and dreamtime speed up
body and brain, isn't that true? They speed up the interior
time, the intime.'
678
  He smiled and squeezed her hand. 'I keep forgetting that you
know ... almost everything.'
  'Not everything,' she said. 'I wouldn't know how to be
married to a pilot. I don't think I'd know how to be married
to anyone.'
  She spoke of many things then, that she had been reluctant
to reveal. They drank tea and ate bloodfruits, and she told him
about her dreams and her secrets and her fears, especially the
fear that all courtesans have: that of growing older more
quickly than other people do. Because courtesans bring
themselves back their youths after only twenty years of ageing,
and because they can only make themselves young again three or
four times, they must face their final old age much sooner than
others. She feared growing old, and she feared losing her
beauty, but more than anything else, she was afraid of what she
might have become if the Society had not accepted her as a
novice twelve years previously. 'If I hadn't left home I would
have died,' she told him. 'I would have grown up to become like
my mother, and that would have killed my soul. I'd be dead
inside, just like everyone else.'
 That night, after she had shut the window and stripped off
her kimono so that she could sit more comfortably, she told him
about her extraordinary family. She had come from a large
astrier family who had settled more or less permanently in
Neverness. Of course, all astrier families are large, and hers
was in no way distinguished because of its size: she was the
tenth of thirty-two children, most of whom still lived with her
parents in a huge house in the Farsider's Quarter. Although it
was unlikely that her family would ever achieve the ideal of a
hundred children, her mother was still quite fertile, and she
continued to give birth year after year. On five different
occasions, she had borne twins, and once, quadruplets. Tamara
suspected that her mother was really quite sick of breeding
babies (as she put it, 'the way furflies breed little white
maggots') but she was an Ashtoreth, an old and proud family who
679
 traced their line of descent, mother and daughter, back more
than the thousand years to Alexandra Evangelina Ashtoreth.
Alexandra was perhaps the most famous mother in history: half
of her children had converted to the new religion of Edeism and
established the Ashtoreth name, while the other half had carked
their DNA and had claded off into the alien race known as the
Hulda. The Hulda had disappeared into obscure parts of the
galaxy, while the Ashtoreth family, in their millions, had gone
on to populate planets. And cities: one of Tamara's ancestors
had immigrated to Neverness and established her family there.
Many Ashtoreths, over the centuries, had since left the City
but many remained. Just south of the Winter Ring, where the
Serpentine winds toward South Beach, the houses and apartments
were overflowing with Ashtoreths. In fact, this district is
known as the Ashtoreth District, and Tamara could count some
ninety thousand cousins, nieces and great-grandaunts who bore
her name. The Ashtoreths were not the only astriers in the
City, but they were exemplars of their religion, and they
upheld their traditions in the strictest manner. Tamara's
mother – her name was Victoria One Ashtoreth – in many ways was
the quintessential astrier matron: imperious, practical,
materialistic, deceitful and intensely critical. She was
fiercely loving, too, and self-sacrificing, patient, proud and
terribly vain. Tamara's greatest fear in life was that she
would grow to become like her mother. And she nearly had. When
she was eleven years old, her mother had betrothed her to a
rich astrier man ten years her senior. She was expected to wait
seven years, to marry, and then begin bearing children. A great
swarm of children: astriers – those who followed any of the
Edic religions – were required to conceive as many children as
possible, to ensoul as much consciousness as possible,
miraculously transmuting dead matter into human beings so that,
at the end of time, the entire life consciousness of the
universe would be united and vastened in Ede the God. By
fleeing
680
 to the Society of Courtesans, Tamara had escaped this fate of
'cancerous motherhood'. The very idea of marriage aroused in
her intense anxiety and dread, and she usually avoided talking
about it. And so, for the first time, as she clutched at
Danlo's hand and gulped her tea, she spoke in her sad,
bittersweet voice, and she told him why she could never marry
him and be his wife.
  'Marriage is the most horrible of all traps,' she said.
'Once a woman begins having babies, there are too many details
to attend to, and no time for ecstasy.'
  Danlo stroked her hand and said, 'But doesn't it seem to you
that astrier marriages ... are extreme?'
  'Marriage is marriage,' she said. 'Even your Alaloi bear a
good many children.'
  'Yes, they do,' he said. He touched the scar above his eye
as he thought about the Alaloi tribes. 'But many of the
children die before they are named.'
'And so the women continue having more babies.'
  'Yes ... but not to replace those who have gone over. At
least, not just to replace them.' He held his hand over his
forehead, remembering. The women of my tribe were very
passionate. Their cries, coming from the snow huts deep in the
cave – this could keep us awake all night, especially in deep
winter when there is almost no end to night. The wives of the
men – they knew about ecstasy. They did not need religion to
encourage them to lie with their husbands.'
  Tamara pulled at the dark hairs on his forearm, then she
said, 'Did the Devaki marry for life?'
 'They married for eternity,' he said. As he ate succulent
pieces of bloodfruit, he told her something of the Alaloi
beliefs concerning the world of spirits. A man's spirit, he
explained – his first self – came into the world naked and
alone, cut off from selves of all living things. But each man
had a doffel, an other-self, a special and magical animal that
he was not permitted to hunt. It was a man's first duty, when
his membrum was cut and he first became a
681
 man, to enter into the dreamtime and identify this other-self.
If he were a full man, his spirit would merge with that of his
other-self, mystically, and he would become his deep self, his
true self that lived in eternity. He would become a part of the
World-Soul. Only then could his deep self seek out that of the
one woman fated to be his wife. How an Alaloi woman became her
deepest self was a secret that he did not know. He knew only
that the completed spirits of man and woman would share
eternity together, and they would give birth to other spirits,
the spirits of their children, and in this way life went on.
 'The Alaloi theology is complex but very beautiful,' she
said. Her face was glowing and her eyes were alive with
interest. 'Your Alaloi are a romantic people.'
  'Yes ... they can be,' he said. He listened carefully to the
way she said the word 'romantic'. He sensed that, at heart, she
was a romantic woman who had concealed many of her desires.
 'You're still an Alaloi man in your soul, aren't you?' she
asked. 'A wild, wild man.'
  In truth, Tamara Ten Ashtoreth loved men as she did life,
and for many years she had dreamed of making a marriage based
on the merging of two souls. She had even dreamed of bearing
children, two children, a boy and a girl. She had kept this
dream a secret; she regarded it as a silly notion of her
childhood self, and she was ashamed of longing for a kind of
union that her mother would have called 'a selfish desire and
really quite impossible'. In an age when few married for love,
and fewer still for life, this was certainly an impractical
desire, if not quite impossible. She must have dreaded that
Danlo would reawaken this desire in her, only to abandon her,
perhaps for the sake of his various quests, or to become a god,
or because he had found something coiled in the secret part of
her: a ravenous and terrible beauty that one day might quicken
into life and devour him.
'You really wouldn't want to marry me,' she said.
682
 'I think ... I do,' Danlo said.
  Slowly, she ate a slice of bloodfruit as she looked at him.
'Would you give up your quest, the whole Vild mission, to
marry?'
  The room was quiet for a long time before he finally said,
'Yes, I think I would.'
  'Well, you shouldn't even consider such things,' she said.
'You shouldn't ever abandon your dreams.'
'But I have ... another dream, now.'
'And your people? The Alaloi?'
  'Lalashu,' he said, 'the blessed People ... are doomed. I
think I have known that for five years.'
  'But could you just abandon them without being certain?'
  Danlo stood and paced around the room, then. The wooden
floor tiles squeaked in rhythm with his heavy footsteps. After
a while, he paused before the window and stared out at the
frozen sea. 'No,' he finally said, 'I could not abandon them.
Even if they are doomed. Especially ... if they are fated to
die.'
  'And I couldn't turn away from the Society,' Tamara said.
She stood up and came over beside him. 'Not now.'
  'Because you have a calling,' he said. He licked his teeth,
which were coated with the bittersweet taste of bloodfruit.
 'I'm involved with the Way of Ringess,' she said. 'Many of us
are.'
  Danlo laughed softly, then said, 'It is ironic: Bardo thinks
he is converting the courtesans ... but it is really the
reverse, yes?'
'We don't try to convert anyone.'
'Hanuman believes differently.'
'Hanuman,' she said. 'He's such a difficult man.'
'Is that why you avoid him?'
  'But he's impossible to avoid, I think. He's quite insistent
about what he wants.'
'He wants to make a new religion,' Danlo said.
683
 'But we're all making this religion, aren't we? All of us who
are involved in the Way. Even you, Danlo. We can make it a
living religion, or let it die, like so many others have died.'
'And then?'
'What do you mean?'
  'If I completed my quest,' he said, 'and if your calling
were successful and you awakened every Ringist in the galaxy
... what then?'
 'Then it would be then,' she said.
 'If I quit the Order, would you quit the Society?'
 'To marry you?'
 'To marry ... yes.'
  She faced him and reached out to stroke the long hair behind
his neck. She kissed his lips, then she smiled and said, 'I
can't look into the future the way you can. Now it's now, and
that's all that really matters. It's very late, you know. Why
don't we sleep now and forget about things that may or may not
ever happen?'
 She took his hand and led him back into the fire room, which
doubled as her sleeping chamber. The fires had burned down to
red embers, and the room was now almost dark and much too cool
for sweating. In fact, it was quite cold, and they needed to
pull sheets and blankets over their bottom fur to keep warm.
They lay holding each other in their silky bed, and soon
Tamara was asleep, breathing softly over his face as he
watched her breasts rise and fall. He lay awake watching her
for a long time as he thought about the way that nowness would
always become thenness, as surely as day followed night, on
and on through a universe without end.
 For the next couple of tendays, even as others were
contemplating new doctrines and technologies that would
forever change the Way of Ringess, Danlo could not forget his
dream of marrying Tamara. While drinking coffee in the
morning, or learning his mathematics, or, as an exer-
684
cise, interfacing his lightship where it rested deep within the
Lightship Caverns – many times each day he thought of his
conversation with her. He concluded that she must have regarded
his talk of marriage as insincere. And, in a way, he had been
insincere. He had given her no promise to marry, no ring or
disk or firestone, or other pledge of his devotion to her. He
had learned enough of civilized customs to know that such
pledges are not always given, that people often marry as easily
and unceremoniously as they might walk into a cafe and place an
order for roasted meatnuts. But, as Tamara had observed, he was
still an Alaloi in his heart, and Alaloi men always give
pledges to the women they intend to marry. They give them alaya
shells or amethysts or rings of carved ivory. Sometimes they
give them pearls. Danlo remembered quite clearly the night he
had met Tamara, the way he had blurted out his desire to give
her a pearl to wear around her neck. She had thought him
insincere then, too. But he was not insincere. Nor had he
spoken idly. He was the poorest of men, much too poor to buy
pearls or gemstones, but since the moment he had first seen
her, he had been thinking of a way that he might give her a
real pearl.
 On the morning of the 61st, he went down to the Quay where
the ice schooners were harboured in neat, colourful rows along
West Beach. He arranged with the boat master to take a sleek,
red schooner out onto the ice. From a supply hut near the
mooring slips, he picked out the few supplies that he would
need for a brief journey: sleeping furs; a heated tent; a
cooking stove and steel utensils; ropes and climbing
paraphernalia; a compass, sextant and maps; a hammer, ice
drill, a shovel, chisels, knives and a heatjet; and enough food
– mainly baldo nuts, dried snowapples and cheese – to last
twelve days. He planned to be gone no more than four days, but
when travelling in deep winter, it was always wisest to apply
the rule of three: that one should always carry three times as
much food as should be needed. No one knew better than Danlo
what it was
685
 like to starve while waiting out a storm far from shore. The
boat master, when he saw the quantity of stores that Danlo was
stowing into the schooner, warned him of the dangers of sailing
alone in deep winter. He was a thin man with a high, reedy
voice nearly lost to the early morning wind that whipped along
the beach: 'I shouldn't let you go, but you're a journeyman,
and there's no telling journeymen what to do. Especially you
pilots – what's the saying in your college? Journeymen Die – is
that right? Be careful, Young Pilot. The sea is more dangerous
than deep space. Stay close to the coast, and keep the
mountains in sight. I don't imagine you could know what it's
like to be lost out on the ice.'
 It might have been safer for him take a dog sled instead of a
schooner. As Danlo had walked down the beach, he had passed
snow-covered sleds and kennels full of soft, whining dogs. He
had not liked the look of these dogs; the city people used them
only for sport and recreation, and he did not wish to entrust
his life to ill-trained dogs he did not know. In truth, ever
since his journey to Neverness, he could not look at a dog
without his stomach knotting up tight and hard as a baldo nut.
And so he balanced his gear in his schooner and hoisted the
bright blue lateen sail. He put on his goggles and said
farewell to the boat master, and then he was off, running
before the wind. The towers of the City vanished behind him,
grey stone points lost into a grey-white glare; ahead was deep
blue sky and hard air and open ice that went on mile after
mile. And always there was the wind that blew at his back and
filled his sail and set the spun-diamond mast singing. The wind
blew him due south. Most icemen who took out schooners sailed
north across the Sound and then tacked against the cold,
constant wind, slowly working their way up the west side of the
island. The west coast of Neverness Island, cut with fiords,
glaciers and green-fir mountains, has long been known for its
beauty. But that day Danlo was seeking beauty of a different
kind, and so he sailed south across
686
 the open sea where the people of the City were not permitted
to go.
 He travelled very quickly. That is the charm of these
graceful, delicate boats, to be able to move quickly across the
ice. Some iceboats, the smaller skeeters or skimmers, when
sailing over glass ice can reach a speed three times that of
the wind. Since the wind blowing out of the northwest in deep
winter is a fast, murderous wind, Danlo's concern was not
keeping up his speed but controlling it. To be sure, his
schooner, with its flat, ski-like runners in place of steel
blades, was the slowest and steadiest of all icecraft, but it
was still no vehicle for the weak-brained or the cowardly. He
sat low in the schooner's cockpit, clutching at the tiller as
it leaped at every rill and bump. He pushed it left or right,
at an instant's warning, to swerve the boat and avoid the
fissures that opened in the ice just ahead of him. Very often,
it was hard to see, with particles of spindrift rattling
against his face mask and goggles. It was hard to breathe; he
thought that everything about ice schooning was hard and cold
and utterly exhilarating. The seascape, in its colours of white
and silver and aquamarine, flew past beneath him at tremendous
speed. The steering blade vibrated like a saw catching at the
ice; the scrape of the runners over the ice shivered along his
legs and up through his scrotum. More than once, the wind
shifted suddenly, stealing his breath away and nearly flipping
the schooner end over end. As he pulled further away from the
shore, the ice grew faster, and in places, even rougher. He
schussed across sets of frozen waves called sastrugi, and the
quick stuttering bumps hurt his teeth and pounded at his spine.
Ten miles out, the sea was covered with hard-packed snow,
safel, as the Alaloi call it, the fast, smooth snow that is
good for sledding. It was good for schooning, too, and in
little time Danlo reached the thirty-mile markers that
demarcate the boundary of Neverness Island. Ahead of him,
planted in the ice at intervals of a thousand feet, was a line
of red poles curving off to either horizon,
687
 east and west. The poles were bent before the wind, pointing
south, as if beckoning for him to continue his journey. Long
ago the Lords of the Order had made a covenant with the Alaloi
people that no civilized person would venture beyond these
bounds. Except for the island that Neverness is built upon, the
whole of the planet named Icefall was to be touched by none but
the Alaloi, forever. Because Danlo would always think of
himself as one of the People – and because he intended to touch
land forbidden to those of the City – he sailed past the poles
with the speed of the wind, and he said the prayer of ail
travellers setting out for unseen islands: 'Ali alli-lo kiro
lisalia.'
   Seventy miles south of Neverness there is an island famous
for the profusion and fecundity of its bird life. The Alaloi
call it Avisalia. It is a small island of mountains, cliffs and
wide, sandy beaches. It stands between Neverness Island and the
Great Southern Ocean. There, where the warm Mishima current
flows close to the land shelf, the sea birds come to feed upon
vast schools of herring, shoko fish, and arctic cod. Each
winter, flocks of birds numbering in the tens of thousands
migrate from the northern islands and build their nests there.
The air above Avisalia, in deep winter, is often white with
clouds of puffins, thallows, ospreys, shirkirts and terns. And
kestrels, skuas, loons and twenty other species of birds. The
thunder of their wings and their harsh hunting calls can be
heard from miles away. Most of these birds overwinter on the
island's sunny southern slopes. They bask in the low, slanting
sun, and they fly out over the beaches, and they use their
talons or beaks to pluck silvery fish from the ocean. On the
southern side of the island, the ocean flows fast and warm and
it rarely freezes. On the island's northern side, however,
there live different birds. There the kitikeesha come to eat
the snow atop the frozen sea, and the snowy owls come to eat
the kitikeesha. The gulls – the snow gulls and hunting gulls –
make their roosts on the steep grey cliffs above
688
the sea. In deep winter, when they cannot get at the meaty
treasures locked up beneath the shore ice, they scavenge the
leavings of bears or of other birds, or, if they get hungry
enough, they turn on their own kind and peck each other to
death. But each year, in false winter when the ice breaks up,
the shallow sea bed yields up an abundance of food, and then
the gulls feast. The shallows along Avisalia's north shore teem
with ice crabs, spirali, and with tens of species of molluscs.
And, of course, with palpulve. At low tide, the wide beach is
carpeted with millions of purple-shelled palpulve. The hunting
gulls like no other food better; it is their instinct to grab
up a living palpulve and soar high into the air, only to drop
it and dash it on the rocks below. In this way, the gulls break
open the shells to get at the meat inside. In hatching season
when their young constantly cry for food and give them no
peace, the gulls fill their crops with the meat of hundreds of
palpulve each day. Perhaps one palpulve in ten contains a shiny
bit of matter walled off from its living tissues: a pearl that
grows inside it like a gleaming, stony egg. The gulls,
rapacious animals that they are, gobble down palpulve meats
like candy, and they make no complaint if they also swallow a
pearl. It is these lustrous silvery or black pearls of the
palpulve that are prized across the Civilized Worlds as the
second most beautiful of all pearls. For generations,
worm-runners from Neverness had flown their windjammers out to
Avisalia to poach these pearls. Each false winter, they would
use diamond knives to open thousands of palpulve and cut the
pearls free, leaving the meat for the gulls. Each season the
gulls gleefully await the coming of the wormrunners, for it
saves them the work of opening the palpulve themselves.
  Had Danlo sailed to Avisalia in false winter, it is likely
that he would have been greeted by hungry gulls circling above
his head and crying out their raucous cries. Had he gone
crunching across the tidal flats in search of palpulve pearls,
it is also likely that the wormrunners would have
689
 greeted him with laser fire or quick diamond knives slipped
between his ribs. But he came to the island's north shore in
the deepest part of deep winter, when all the world was frozen
and peaceful. His journey from Neverness had taken less than a
day. A hundred feet from the beach, he struck his sail and
anchored his schooner onto long screws that he twisted into the
ice. He erected his heated tent. Out of nostalgia for his
youth, he considered building a snow hut to sleep in, but he
had no ice saw for the cutting of snow blocks, nor did he have
the tools to make such a saw. In truth, a heated tent was much
roomier and more comfortable than any snow hut, and so he
hauled his sleeping furs inside his tent, and he spent the
night listening to the clary fabric flapping in the wind and to
the gulls calling to each other on the cliffs high above the
beach. The next morning, he ate a cold, quick breakfast of
cheese and flat bread, and went to work.
  Onto a small red sled, the kind a child might use to slide
down a snowy hillside, he lashed his shovel, buckets, heat gun,
knives, and other gear. He faced south, toward the cliffs where
the gulls roosted. Their cries rose high on the morning wind.
He could see them at the edge of the island, thousands of
little white specks against the broken rocks. He counted
ninety-thousand of them before he gave up and began surveying
the cliffs. The cliffs were a dark grey wall that ran along the
beach for two miles. Above the cliffs there were snowfields and
shatterwood forests and the dark blue sky. He looped a rope
around his mittens and pulled the sled straight for the cliffs.
He pulled it across frozen waves and thick-ribbed snow. Below
him, beneath twelve feet of ice, were millions of palpulve,
hibernating through the winter. He might have chopped through
this ice and brought them up in buckets; he might have used his
knife to cut them open, but that would have killed them, and
this he could not do. From his early years of watching sea
birds, he knew of another way of finding pearls. He pulled his
sled across the shoreline, up across
690
 the frozen sands and dune scarp. Now he was closer to the foot
of the cliffs, and now the screaming of the gulls drowned out
all other sound. Despite the bitter cold, the rich nitrogen
smell of bird droppings was overpowering. There were droppings
everywhere. The whitish guano was spattered over rocks, and
streaked against the cliff face, and piled up in great stinking
mounds many feet thick. Up and down the beach, there were miles
of guano mounds that had accumulated in layers over the years.
The topmost layer was as thin as a sheet of skin; it was moist
and slimy, and it was being laid down by the birds above him
even as he stood there. Fresh bird droppings fell over him like
warm rain, smearing his furs, spattering the lenses of his
goggles. He dragged his sled across the mounds, and his boots
made a squelch-squirch sound as the gooey new guano sucked at
them and made for perilous walking. Closer to the base of the
cliffs, he picked up his shovel and began digging. He cleared
away the surface droppings to reveal the permanently frozen
guano below. He used his heatjet to thaw this guano, layer
after layer, and he dug it up and sieved through it for the
pearls. Over the next two days he found many pearls. He filled
his buckets with them. Each of these pearls had passed through
the gizzard and vent of a palpulve-eating gull. Most of them
were of poor quality, too small or misshapen or scoured by the
stomach acids of the gulls. He examined and discarded 1,038
pearls before he found one that he liked. After cleaning this
pearl with fresh snow, he held it up to the sunlight. It was a
large pearl the size of his thumb-tip; it was of an iridescent,
purplish-grey colour that the Alaloi call lila. It was not a
perfect pearl, neither perfectly round nor uniform in hue. The
Alaloi mistrust perfection in pearls; perfect pearls they find
coldly beautiful but uninteresting. Danlo's pearl was shaped
like a teardrop and in various places around its smooth surface
it gleamed with soft pink undertones. 'As the jewellers in the
Diamond District say, it was 'the kind of pearl you can look
into forever and it will never end'.
691
 After looking at it through most of an afternoon, he decided
that he had found his pearl. He used a laser drill then, to
burn a tiny hole through the narrowest part of it. Through this
hole he threaded strands of his long black hair that he had
plucked from his head and twisted into a string. He cemented
the ends of the string together with some shaving glue, and
when he had finished, he had a pearl pendant that Tamara might
slip over her head and wear around her neck. He dropped the
pendant into a silk bag, the kind that Bardo employed to
distribute strands of toalache or triya seeds. He pulled tight
the bag's drawstrings and put it in his pocket. And then he
prepared to return to Neverness.
 His journey back across the ice was uneventful, though it
took him two full days. The wind blew mostly from due north and
he had to tack against it, beating northeast or northwest, or
sometimes due west when the wind shifted suddenly. He paused
once to explore a tiny, nameless island equidistant between
Avisalia and Neverness. On this island he came across the naked
white bones of a walrus washed up on the rocky beach. He was
lucky enough to find one of the walrus' tusks whole and
undamaged. He scavenged this tusk and stowed it in his
schooner. The best part of his expedition had been the
rediscovery of his natural passion for making things. The
moment that he saw the tusk, he devised a plan to carve it,
into rings and a pipe and animal sculptures, and most of all,
into an ivory chess piece to replace the missing god in
Hanuman's set. It was his hope that he might heal the wounds in
their friendship by giving him a gift that he had made himself.
And so he returned to the City, full of his success and dreams
of the future. He burned his ruined furs and spent half a day
in the hot pool of his dormitory, cleaning himself of guano and
showing the pearl pendant to his friends. After sleeping for a
night and half the next day, he made arrangements to visit
Tamara late in the following afternoon.
692
 He met her in her tea room, where they sat together as she
served him coffee and grilled breads. It had been a day of
bright, clear air and high spirits and sunlight streaming
golden through the windows. Tamara basked in the last of this
sunlight, naked as an animal, with only her long golden hair
covering her. She liked to watch the play of the light rays
through her lace curtains as the sun fell slowly into the west.
'I have been away from the City these past days,' Danlo said to
her.
  'In the lightship of yours that you call The Snowy Owl? Have
you taken it into the manifold?'
 'No,' he said, 'I took a schooner out onto the sea.' He
quickly told her of his journey, and then he pulled his silk
bag from his pocket and set it on the table. 'I have brought
you something ... to wear around your neck.'
 She picked up the bag and used her long fingernails to tease
open the drawstring. She spilled the pearl pendant into her
hand, and her eyes jumped with light as she looked at it. 'Oh,
it's very beautiful!' she said. 'I've never seen such a
beautiful pearl.'
  She looked at him and smiled, and then they were both
laughing together as if they had just tasted some new, euphoric
drug. She held the black pearl in her hand, and the contrast it
made with her ivory skin was striking.
  'It should slip over your head,' Danlo said to her. 'I made
the string long ... so that it would slip over easily.'
  'I can see it's thoughtfully designed,' she said. She rubbed
her finger up and down the shiny string.
  'I made the string ... with my own hair. It is a custom of
the Alaloi.'
  'It's beautiful,' she said. She reached out to stroke the
hair on his head. 'I suppose I guessed that you made it that
way. You have such beautiful hair, so long and thick. I've
always thought that hair like yours shouldn't be wasted on a
man.'
693
  'Someday I might be old and bald,' he said. 'But if I have a
wife ... she would still wear this pearl.'
  Tamara smiled as she set the pendant atop the table, next to
her coffee pot. She stood up and said, 'I've something to show
you.' She stepped into her meditation room, for a moment, and
then returned carrying a long, flat shatterwood box. It was
hinged at the back, and it opened like a palpulve shell. This
came for me this morning,' she said. 'I thought you might like
to see it.'
Danlo took the box and sat looking at her.
'Why don't you open it, please?'
 He opened the box and peered inside. There, against a padding
of black velvet, was a necklace of creamy pearls. The pearls
were graded by size and matched by colour, and each pearl was a
work of perfect symmetry. There were thirty-three pearls along
a strand of platinum. Danlo knew nothing about modern
jewellery, but he suspected that the necklace must be very
valuable.
'They are ... splendid,' he said.
'They're Gilada pearls,' she said.
  Of all the pearls of the Civilized Worlds, Gilada pearls are
the most prized. They are fabricated on the artificial world of
Gilada, which lies at the edge of the Vild. They are assembled
molecule by molecule in a vacuum without light or sound or any
vibration. There, deep in space where there is no gravity to
deform the iridescent nacre as it is layered down around a
single seed molecule, the Gilada jewellers make perfectly
spherical pearls. The making of a single pearl can take more
than a year. Gilada pearls are famed for their perfect beauty,
but also because no one except the perfectly rich can afford
them.
'This must have come from a merchant-prince,' Danlo said.
  'No, I've never consorted with Trians,' she said. 'It's from
Hanuman.'
  'Hanuman! Hanuman ... li Tosh? But how could he get the
money to buy such pearls?'
694
'I don't know,' she said.
  Danlo rubbed his finger over the largest of Hanuman's
pearls, accidentally leaving skin oils to smear its perfect
surface. 'It is a remarkable coincidence that Hanuman sent you
these pearls ... this morning.'
'Did you tell him you were going to give me a pearl?'
  'I never ... talked to him. We do not talk any more. But I
showed the pearl to my friends. It is possible one of them told
him.'
'Then there's the secret of your coincidence.'
  'Yes, it must be. But why would Hanuman give you pearls?'
'Well, he's been wooing me since the night we met.'
 'Wooing you ... to marry?'
  'I don't think so. But there are many ways of wooing, you
know.'
 'The night at the party, do you remember?' Danlo said. The
way Hanuman looked at you – it was obvious that he burned for
you.'
'Oh, the poor incandescent man!'
'You say that so coldly.'
'Do I? I don't mean to.'
'You do not like Hanuman very much, I think.'
  'It's not true that I don't like him,' she said. She looked
down at the box that Danlo was holding, at the strand of
pearls. 'I'm afraid of him.'
'Because he is a cetic?'
  'Because he's so controlled,' she said. 'I've never known
anyone to have such control of himself.'
 'But the cetics strive to master all their emotions. All
their thoughts ... what they call their programs.'
'It seems he's succeeded too well.'
'Perhaps he only wants people to think that.'
'And people do,' she said.
 'Hanuman has his passions like anyone else. But the greater
the passion ... the greater the need for control.'
'Do you remember what he said during the sermon?
695
 "Only by becoming fire will we ever be free from burning". I
don't think his passion is women, not any more.'
 Danlo smiled to himself, and he thought that he understood a
thing about her. He saw her as a completely beautiful woman,
the kind of woman who had always commanded the affections of
men. Such women, he supposed, naturally mistrusted any man over
whom they had no sexual hold. That Hanuman could cut himself
off at will from all sexual desire must have horrified her and
insulted her sense of her own special powers.
 'You would never consider making a contract with him, then?'
 'Oh, I've considered it,' she said. 'A courtesan has to
consider such things, even if it's quite impossible that she'd
ever carry through with such considerations.'
 'Of all the men in Neverness,' Danlo said, 'who else has need
of your art as Hanuman does?'
'Aren't you jealous of him even slightly?'
  Danlo smiled and shook his head. 'When I was a boy, my
found-father taught me that jealousy is shaida. It poisons the
soul.'
 'But Hanuman is so dead inside. He's all coldness and ashes.'
 'You could wake him up,' Danlo said. 'Make him alive again,
yes?'
  Tamara tapped her fingernail against the rim of her coffee
cup. She seemed to be contemplating the patches of light that
floated atop the coffee's dark surface. 'You must love him very
much, to say such a thing.'
 'I love him ... as I would love my brother,' Danlo said.
'Would you give me away so easily?'
 'When an Alaloi hunter visits another tribe,' Danlo said,
'often he must leave his wife at home. He makes his journey
across the ice, alone, many miles and many days. When he
arrives at his destination, he is cold and hungry. Often, one
of his near-brothers will lend him his wife for a few nights.
To warm him inside and ease his hunger.'
696
'But we're not Alaloi,' she said. 'At least, I'm not.'
'No, that is true.'
'And I'm not yours to give.'
  'Even among the Alaloi,' he admitted, 'the wife must make a
gift of herself, or else the hunter must bear the cold.'
 'I could never give myself to Hanuman,' she said. 'Any other
man, but not him.'
 Danlo rapped his knuckles against the wooden box that Hanuman
had sent her. He looked at the necklace of Gilada pearls,
glittering in the light. He said, Then you will send back the
pearls?'
 'I wish I could,' she said. She sighed and ran her fingers
through her hair. 'I wish things could be so simple.'
'Is it that you do not want to wound his heart?'
  'Oh, I think his emotional organs are beyond such delicacy.'
'No ... never beyond.'
 'The truth is, I can't risk offending him,' she said. 'He's
not wooing me simply for himself.'
'For your Society, then?'
  She nodded her head. 'He's sent gifts to other courtesans.
Nothing so exquisite as this necklace, but he's wooing my
sisters, too.'
'All this wooing must irk Bardo ... endlessly.'
'Well,' she said, 'Bardo is a jealous man.'
 'It is unseemly ... to fight over women.'
  'At least Bardo appreciates us for who we really are. My
sisters have told me that they've never known a man who loved
women as he does.'
 Danlo smiled as he remembered a story he had heard about
Bardo: that the huge, prepotent man had once swived nineteen
women in a single night.
  'Would you rather it was Bardo who sent you the pearls?'
 'I'd rather not be sent gifts that I can't return.' She
lifted Hanuman's necklace out of the box and held it away from
697
 her as if it were a dead snake. 'I can't return this, you
know. The Mother wouldn't want me to.'
'The Mother ... is the head of your Society?'
  Again, she nodded her head. The Mother, at this time, wishes
none of us to offend either Bardo or Hanuman.'
'I see,' he said. The Mother is a courteous woman, yes?'
'She's the wisest woman I've ever known.'
 'Then she is watching our church, yes? Watching and waiting.'
  'You're not so naive about politics as you'd like everyone
to think.'
  'I know ... hardly anything,' he said. 'Only that Bardo has
charisma and power, but Hanuman is more wilful. It is
impossible to say who will prevail.'
'And whom do you wish to prevail?'
 At this simple question, Danlo stood and began pacing around
the room. 'I am not sure,' he said. 'I am not sure that either
of them could make the Way of Ringess ... into something
worthwhile. Something blessed. I am not sure that anyone could
make it so.'
'We could,' she said softly.
 'There speaks your pride,' he said, and he sat down next to
her and kissed her forehead. There speaks your love.'
 'Should we let Hanuman's vision sweep everyone else's aside?'
  Danlo looked at the pearls dangling from Tamara's hand. They
were perfect and beautiful and utterly cold, and he suddenly
remembered Hanuman's universe of dolls, which had been too
perfect as well.
  'Hanuman has his vision,' he said. 'But we have ours, too.'
'And that's why we should preserve it while we can.'
'What do you mean?'
 'Haven't you received your invitation to copy your
remembrance?'
  'What do you mean? How could my remembrance ... be copied?'
698
 'Then you haven't heard? Hanuman has asked some of us to copy
our remembrances into a computer that he's made.'
 Now quite alarmed, Danlo was up off the cushions again,
pacing back and forth, rubbing his finger along his forehead.
'But our remembrances cannot be copied! Why would Hanuman say
he could do such a thing?'
 Tamara replaced Hanuman's necklace in its box. She stood up
and placed her hand on Danlo's chest. 'Everyone knows how hard
it is to remembrance the Eddas,' she said. 'Many of the
godlings have never had a dear memory, let alone an inkling of
the One Memory.'
  While Danlo stood staring out the window at the silvery ice
of the Sound, she told him about Hanuman's plan to perfect the
remembrance of the Elder Eddas. Three days ago, she said,
Hanuman had begun inviting Ringists of the inner circle to copy
their memories into a computer. He promised that he could
record whole sequences of memories as one might record musical
notes on a synthesizer. It was his plan to edit and enhance
these memories, to merge them into what he called an 'essential
remembrance'. A perfect remembrance – Hanuman claimed that any
godling or new Ringist, upon interfacing his computer, would
experience a perfectly vivid remembrance of the Elder Eddas.
'This is very bad,' Danlo said.
'Do you think so?'
'Yes.'
'Well, Bardo has consented to Hanuman's plan.'
  Danlo covered his face with his hands and began rubbing his
eyes. Then he looked out the window for a long time, watching
the moons come out against the twilight sky. He finally said,
'Yes, Bardo has feared the remembrancing of the Eddas, too. He
is the founder of a new religion – what if someone remembrances
a truth that this religion calls false? What if a person of
vision sees falseness ... in all that Bardo holds as true?'
699
'But, Danlo, what is truth?'
He smiled and said, 'I have wondered this all my life.'
  'Whatever truth really is, don't you think that we should
allow Hanuman to copy our remembrances? So that our truths can
be incorporated into this essential remembrance?'
'Are our truths so truthful then?'
  'Oh, I think they are,' she said. 'You've had a great
remembrance, as everyone knows, and you've described it so
beautifully, even if you always claim that you're clumsy with
words. And I've seen such miraculous things, too. What are the
Elder Eddas but a way of waking ourselves up? All of ourselves.
To let the energy of consciousness consume us, atom by atom,
cell by cell – there's an utterly ruthless force inside each of
us that destroys and creates and destroys and creates, and it's
all there waiting for us to let it be born, if only we could
bear all the blood and the terror and the screaming. It's the
most beautiful thing in the universe. I'd die to see this
vision made true.'
 He rubbed his head and sighed. Then you have decided to copy
your memories into Hanuman's computer?'
'Won't you?'
'No,' he said.
 'Of course not – you're not afflicted with pride as I am.'
She turned away from him and stared at the polished stones
lining her window sill.
 'Tamara,' he said. He looked at the blonde hair hanging down
her long, lithe back. He touched her shoulder and said, 'I love
this pride of yours.'
'You do?'
'As I love the wind.'
 She turned to face him, then, and she locked eyes with him.
'Didn't you tell me that the wind almost killed you once?'
 'Yes, that is true,' he said. 'But it is also true that the
wind is the breath of the world. Just as your pride is your
strength and your life.'
700
'Do you really think so?'
'Yes,' he said.
  'I was told once that my pride was an ugly program that
would destroy me.'
'No, it is a blessed thing.'
  'When I was a child,' she said, 'the readers in my church
tried to cleanse me of pride and other sins but they never
really succeeded.'
'If they had, then you would not be who you are.'
  'No, of course not,' she said, and she laughed nervously.
'I've often wondered if all the efforts to cleanse my pride
only made me more vain.'
  'What is it that the Architects teach? – "Vanity is
insanity"?'
'I suppose you must hate me for being so vain.'
  'No, it is just the opposite,' he said softly. 'Each of your
vainglories is like a pearl – unique, splendid, blessed. And
beautiful.'
 'It's you who are beautiful,' she said. She gazed at him for
a long time. 'I've never known anyone like you before.'
He bowed his head once, then looked at her.
  'No one has ever really seen me as you have,' she said. 'I
don't think anyone ever could.'
  He searched her dark eyes, then, looking for the deepest of
all her vainglories. At last, he thought he saw it, gleaming
like a natural pearl, this vision that she had of herself as a
goddess of terrible beauty, the embodiment of all life's
energies as well as the urge to death. She is terrible beauty,
he thought. Ever after, he would love her for this deep,
primeval beauty, and he would cherish this quality above all
others.
'Yugena los anasa,' he said.
'What does that mean?'
'It means,' he said, ' "To see deeply is to love deeply".'
 She smiled as if she were a little girl again, then she
stepped over to the table. She picked up the box containing the
string of Gilada pearls. With a flip of her hand, she
701
snapped shut the box. The sound of wood against wood resonated
through the room. 'I suppose I should keep these,' she said. 'I
really wouldn't wish to offend Hanuman. But I'll never wear
them, I could never wear them, now.'
  She scooped up the pendant that Danlo had made, and she let
it dangle from her fingers. The tear-shaped black pearl caught
the colours of the night as it swung back and forth in the air.
'Men have given me many things, but no one has ever given me
anything like this,' she said.
 'I made it ... for you to wear,' he said.
'I wish I could wear it,' she said.
'I wish that as well.'
 'If I did wear it,' she said, 'I suppose there would be a
meaning to my wearing it?'
'Only the meaning we would give it.'
  'But don't the Alaloi view the giving of a pearl as a
promise to marry?'
'You could wear this as a troth, if you would like.'
'A troth between both of us?'
'Your promise to marry me, and mine to marry you.'
'But what would I give you?'
'The pleasure of seeing this pearl close to your heart.'
 'But would we have to appoint a time for the fulfilment of
this troth? I still have my calling, you know. You still have
your quest.'
 'Any troth we made would be ... timeless. We have all the
time in the universe.'
 She looked down at the pearl, and she said, 'I've never seen
anything so beautiful before.'
 Seeing his moment, he stepped forward to take the pendant
from her. Although his whole body vibrated with excitement and
he could scarcely breathe, he moved quickly, deftly. With his
fingers, he spread out the pendant's black string and slipped
it over her head. This trapped her long hair against her neck
and shoulders. As
702
 he pulled her hair free, the pearl fell into place between
her breasts.
 'Oh,' she said, 'I hadn't expected it would be so heavy.'
 'The pearls of the palpulve are very large,' he said.
'I didn't think I'd like wearing it so much.'
'You were made to wear it,' he said.
'I didn't think I'd ever marry anyone.'
'I have always hoped ... that I might marry you.'
'Well, I think I'd love to marry you,' she said.
 'I have dreamed that someday, this will be our greatest joy.'
  'Oh, but we'll always have joy,' she said. 'We were made for
joy.'
 He looked at her, and in her eyes there was nothing but joy,
a pure, golden joy that spread out like light and warmed him
inside. She kissed him then, and she led him into the fire
room. That evening they practised none of the exercises of her
art, nor did they take care who lay atop whom or for how long.
They fell into an easy and natural love play that went on and
on until they cried out in joy and clasped each other in
exhaustion. For a long time, he lay next to her, holding her so
tightly that his chest was crushed against hers. He felt the
hardness of the pearl pressing his breastbone, cutting into the
skin above his heart. The entire universe, for him, had
narrowed to the immediacy of deep breathing and the thick salty
scent of her neck and this little pain that gave him so much
joy. He was full of joy, full of pride in finding a wife who
would someday bear his children; although he feared this fierce
pride more than he feared death, he could not remember having
ever been so happy.
703



CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

The Ceremony of Remembrance

 After the Holocaust, on Old Earth and across the Civilized ,
there arose universal religions seeking to unlock and explain
the mysteries of life. There were Logism and The Passion and
the Science of God. And Edeism, and Zanshin, and the Way of
the Serpent. And so on. All told, during the Fifth and Sixth
Mentalities of humankind, there have been 223 such religions.
And all of them, in order to unleash the so-called spiritual
energies, have institutionalized the use of drugs: sex, music
or word drugs, or plant drugs such as the sacred teonancatl,
or synthetic drugs, or the most potent drug of all, which is
the interface of the human mind with the cybernetic spaces of
the accursed computer.
 – from A Requiem For Homo Sapiens by Horthy Hosthoh

The next day Hanuman li Tosh invited Danlo to meet him in the
computer room of Bardo's cathedral. To call it 'Bardo's
cathedral' was misleading, for although Bardo oversaw
everything that happened within that great heap of stones, he
did not own the building, nor did the Way of Ringess. The
Timekeeper, remembering too well the history of Old Earth, long
ago had delimited the power of all organizations within the
City. (Excepting the Order, of course.) The Timekeeper had
decreed that the societies, cartels, associations and religions
seeking to establish themselves in Neverness should have no
legal status nor should they be able to own property. In
keeping with the covenants between the Order and the City,
Bardo's
704
cathedral was owned in condominium by the many Ringists who
had paid for its purchase. These Ringists, toward the latter
third of deep winter in the year 2953, numbered at least four
thousand. And there were more of them every day. Since
Hanuman's Fire Sermon, the evening joyances inside the
cathedral were packed with men and women wishing to begin the
great journey toward godhood. There were so many new Ringists
that Surya Lal, who had become Bardo's confidante and
administrator, had to use a computer to enrol their names.
  'If this growth continues, we'll have to hold two joyances
daily,' Bardo was heard to tell Surya. There are so many of
these new godlings. Too many to know by name and face, too bad.
Even for one with a memory such as mine. And if they don't know
Bardo, by God, why should they be loyal to Bardo? It's my
thought that we should require the new Ringists to take an
oath, along with their profession of the Three Pillars. An oath
of loyalty and obedience to me.'
 On a cold day, late in the afternoon of the 66th, Danlo made
the short journey through the streets of the Old City to the
cathedral. The Old City is full of fine old buildings, some of
them quite tall, some of them graceful, glittering sweeps of
organic stone. Bardo's cathedral stood out among them not
because of its height or its splendour, but because of its
quaintness (as well as its beauty). It occupied most of a block
just south of Danladi Square. Because most of the streets in
that part of the City parallel the Old City Glissade, which
runs straight from the Hollow Fields to North Beach, the blocks
around Danladi Square are oriented from northwest to southeast.
But Bardo's cathedral had been built on an exact east-west
axis; thus, unlike any of the hotels or towers nearby, it sat
on the block obliquely, at an odd angle. The makers of the
cathedral – they were Kristians of the Society of Kristoman the
God – had built it that way because the cathedrals of Old Earth
that were the glory of their religion had each
705
 been laid out east to west. Bardo's cathedral followed this
ancient design; as seen from deep space, it was laid out as a
cross, a shape and symbol known to be sacred to all sects of
Kristians. The head of the cross pointed east toward the
Academy; the foot of the cross was practically planted in the
heart of the Old City. In between was eight hundred feet of
graceful stonework, long windows, and great flying buttresses
made of granite blocks. Where the arms of the cathedral met the
building's main body, above the crossing, a magnificent tower
had been built. This central tower rose up a hundred and fifty
feet above the rest of the cathedral, and it could be seen from
the Academy. With its intricate traceries that seemed to drip
across the granite facing like icicles, with its arched windows
and delicate aretes pointing toward the heavens, it was
considered one of the most beautiful structures in the City.
Bardo, however, thought that the tower's sharp angles and
rectilinearity made for the wrong shape with which to surmount
his cathedral. (Curiously, he did not mind holding his joyances
in a building shaped like a cross. As a student of symbols who
had once considered becoming a notationist, he knew that the
cross was one of the oldest of symbols, much older than any
church or religion. The cross – according to the notationists –
is the great Tree of Life which stands at the centre of the
universe. It is the bridge over which the soul makes its
crossing in order to reach God. The most ancient meaning of the
cross is that of life's suffering. Two kindling sticks crossed
together and rubbed, as a man rubs against a woman, will ignite
the terrible fire that is all life.) And so Bardo had plans to
pull down the tower and to replace it with a golden clary dome.
He wanted to open the cathedral's ceiling vault, so that from
inside, the heavens could be seen in all their glory. Bardo had
other plans as well, as Danlo discovered that day when he
skated off the gliddery and approached the cathedral's western
portal. There, Bardo stood beneath the great centre archway.
Although he was busy directing the refurbishing of the
706

 cathedral's facade, he noticed Danlo skating up the ice and
called to him.
  'Hello, Danlo!' his voice boomed out. 'Well Little Fellow,
how do you like our little stone hut?'
 Danlo skated up to him, and he bowed. Then he glided back a
few yards, the better to see the changes that Bardo was carving
into the cathedral. Three doorways opened out of the western
front; although the centre doorway was much the largest – even
Bardo seemed small standing next to the massive double doors –
they were each of a similar design: they were set into huge,
pointed, stone archways that opened up and out towards the
street. At the centre of the main archway, above the doors, was
a circular window of stained glass. This lovely, light-filled
archway was really a series of nine nested arches, each arch
surmounting and projecting out from the one below it. The rims
of the arches had been carved with stone saints and prophets,
and other personages dear to the Kristian religion. Indeed,
these icons fairly festooned the entire facade, and the largest
of them could be seen staring out with stony eyes from the
statue niches above the archways. Bardo, of course, as the
founder of Ringism, could not countenance these icons. And so
he had determined to remove them. The cathedral's entire
western face swarmed with robots accomplishing this program.
There were thousands of robots, each the size of a furfly. They
clicked and scurried over the archways like a furious moving
carpet, chewing at the stone with tiny diamond chisels. The air
was full of their scraping and hammering and crunching, and
full as well with stone chips and dust that fell down over
Bardo and powdered his curly black hair. Soon, he told Danlo,
every icon in the cathedral, inside and out, would be gone. He
said that other robots would lay down organic stone in the
icons' place. From this stone would emerge sculptures of
Katharine the Scryer, Balusilustalu, Shanidar, and others who
had guided Mallory Ringess along the path to godhood.
707
 'And we'll have to rip out the windows, too bad,' Bardo said.
'But we can't have the godlings dwelling on ancient
superstitions and miracles, can we?'
 'But the stained glass ... it is so beautiful.'
  'Ah, but we'll replace the glass, of course. Actually, I've
already begun replacing it, as you'll see when you enter the
cathedral.'
  They stood there for a while exchanging pleasantries and
bits of gossip. Bardo, pretending to a sternness that the lines
of his fat face could never quite hold, asked him why he had
absented himself from all church functions since the Fire
Sermon. Danlo told him that he had spent his time perfecting
his lightship and making mathematics. He had to raise his voice
above the whine of the robots to make himself heard. And all
the while Bardo nodded his head as he snorted and coughed at
the stone dust raining down upon him.
  'Ah, of course,' Bardo said, 'you're a pilot and pilots must
make mathematics. I, myself, once found mathematics to be the
most beautiful of all creations. Your father and I used to
joke that each of the theorems we made was like discovering a
beautiful pearl.'
  He emphasized the word 'pearl' with a plosive rush of
breath, accidentally spraying droplets of spittle out into the
air. He shot Danlo a pointed look, and a huge grin split his
face.
 'I think ... you must know every secret in the City,' Danlo
finally said, and then he was smiling, too.
  'Have you given your pearl to Tamara?' Bardo asked. 'By God,
she's the most beautiful woman in the City! Have you promised
to marry her, yet?'
  'Am I so easy to read, then?' Danlo asked. 'Has Hanuman
taught you face reading?'
  'No, he's taught me nothing, too bad. At least, he's taught
me nothing explicitly. He likes his solitude, now that he's
become famous.'
 'You cannot forgive him ... for what he did during the Fire
Sermon?'
708
'Forgive him!'
'You do not trust him, I think.'
  Bardo sneezed and rubbed the stone dust away from his eyes.
Then he pulled Danlo deeper into the recess of the archway so
they might be shielded from falling debris. 'Do you trust him,
Little Fellow?'
 'He is my ... deepest friend.'
 'Well, he's my friend, too, or he used to be before he began
posing as a goddamned prophet. Can one trust a prophet? Ah, do
I really trust him? Should I? A difficult question. I trust
him to attract people to the Way. I trust him to give great
sermons and inspire them. I even trust him to show them
something of the ineffable, these goddamned Elder Eddas that
everyone thinks they want to remember. He's a religious
genius, by God! and I trust him to do what all geniuses do,
which is to glory in their genius and let it shine so that
others can glory, too.'
  With these words, Bardo might have been mocking himself,
for, as he grinned at Danlo and pulled at his moustache, his
eyes were full of light.
  Danlo met his gaze and said, 'But you trust Hanuman ... to
cark our remembrances into a computer?'
'Ah, I wondered if you would ask me about this.'
'Is it true, Bardo?'
 'Seven years I've known you now, and you're still questioning
me!'
  'But why shouldn't I question you?' Danlo said, and there
was a smile on his lips. 'If I desisted, I would ruin your
pleasure of delivering your answers.'
 'True, true,' Bardo said. Then let me answer this one
question, and we'll both be content. You know I've said before
that the kalla is a dangerous drug. It's too, too dangerous,
and therefore we've decided to disband the kalla ceremony. No
one is to drink the kalla anymore. At least, no one is to drink
it publicly. But the godlings must have their remembrances, and
so we've instituted another
709
 ceremony. That is, tonight we'll institute it. We'll hold a
special joyance – I'll guide the ceremony, and Hanuman will be
seen to assist me, do you understand?'
'I think I do,' Danlo said.
 'There will be a thousand people in the nave tonight,' Bardo
said. 'And each of them will have remembrances they've never
had before. My remembrances, some of them. Thomas Rane's. And
yours, too, I hope.'
'My ... remembrances,' Danlo said, closing his eyes.
'You did receive Hanuman's invitation?'
Danlo said nothing, and then he nodded his head.
 'Excellent! I'm glad you've agreed to record your
remembrances.'
  Danlo, who had agreed to no such thing, opened his eyes and
looked inside the cathedral. He felt Bardo's gaze burning his
cheeks, and he said, 'Hanuman has promised me that my first
remembrance ... can be perfectly preserved.'
  'Like a firefly preserved in ice,' Bardo said. 'And we've
little enough time to preserve it. I'd like to, ah, incorporate
your great remembrance with the others and use it for tonight's
ceremony.'
 'You would use my memories ... so soon?'
  'We have to move quickly,' Bardo said. 'Ah, but that's the
hell of guiding the manswarm into the mystic pools of
enlightenment: if we don't move quickly enough, events will
rise up like an ocean and sweep us away.'
 He proceeded to give Danlo directions to the computer room,
then he excused himself and returned to supervizing the
renovation of his cathedral.
 When Danlo passed through the doorway into the great nave, he
was immediately swept away by memories that welled up within
him. He had never been inside a cathedral before, neither this
one nor any other. He knew this as surely as he knew that he
had never climbed the ice mountains of Agathange's moon, yet,
as he stood looking off into the fountains of light pouring
through the
710
windows, he felt as though he had stood there a thousand times
before. Despite the robots swarming over the outside walls,
inside all was calm and quiet. Cold currents of air sifted
through the deserted nave, and through the transepts that gave
out onto the crossing. On either side of him, the walls and the
windows and the multiple columns supporting the ceiling vault
rose up in uninterrupted vertical lines. High above him, great
fingers of stone splayed out from these columns in long,
graceful arches that met each other along the centre line of
the vault. It seemed that these sweeps of stone had been flung
up and magically suspended in space. The whole design of the
cathedral bespoke a desire to cancel gravity and elevate matter
toward the heavens. Everywhere Danlo looked, it was as if the
fundamental religious feeling of man had been frozen into stone
and coloured glass. The pillars and the pinnacles, even the
ornaments of stone, he thought, bore memories of ten thousand
years of chants and incantations. The windows – the long
mosaics of stained glass that were the cathedral's glory – bore
scenes of miracles that Kristoman the God was said to have
worked. Already, ten of these windows had been knocked out and
replaced with bits of new glass. A little drama cut in colours
of blue, green, yellow, and deep red had been set into the
arched mosaics high above: the low afternoon sunlight
illuminated the great figure of Bardo as he opened his mouth in
a silent scream and shook his fist at the sky. A long spear
stuck out from his chest, and blood spattered his white furs.
It was one of the great moments in Bardo's life, when he had
died his first death. As Bardo never tired of telling people,
he had given his life so that Mallory Ringess might live, and
now he had worked the truth of this moment into stained glass
for all to see. He had plans for replacing all the old stained
glass with new glass depicting great moments in the life of
Mallory Ringess. (It never seemed to embarrass Bardo that he
confused his best friend's greatness with his own.) As Danlo
walked deeper into the
711
 nave, he looked from window to window, and he wondered what
these moments might be. He marvelled at the play of light
through the windows, the way the colours deepened or brightened
at the passing of every cloud. The whole cathedral was
brilliant with blue and golden light, and everywhere he looked,
he was reminded of all life's aspiration toward light. It
amused him that this light was everywhere dazzling and lovely,
no matter that it streamed through windows new or old.
  He walked through the nave and past the chancel, where
red-carpeted steps led up to a simple altar. In preparation for
the night's remembrance, the altar had been set with golden
candelabra, the golden urn and blue bowl used in a hundred
kalla ceremonies, and with one thousand and eighty-nine freshly
cut fireflowers. Past the altar, down a quiet aisle lined with
statues and columns, he came to a door that led into a
passageway. The computer room, Bardo had told him, lay outside
the cathedral proper. Adjacent to the cathedral's north side
was a collection of small buildings connected by a maze of
roofed passageways, walled gardens, and cloisters. Down this
dim passageway Danlo walked, past the sacristy and the library
until he came to the doors of the chapter house. Once, this
lovely building had been used as a meeting place for the
luminaries of the Kristian church on Neverness, but now it had
been converted into a workplace and a storeroom. He knocked on
the door, and it opened, and there stood Hanuman straight and
proud in his cetic's robe.
'Hello, Danlo,' he said.
'Hello, Hanuman.'
  He invited Danlo inside, and to thaw the instant chill that
fell between them, Hanuman talked about the various objects of
the room. It was a large room full of many objects, most of
them computers of one sort or another. The upper half of the
chapter house was a granite dome cut with long windows between
the stone ceiling ribs; it
712
was all open space and light, but the lower half was all
clutter. Scalloped arches and false pillars formed a stone
panelling around the room's perimeter. Originally, circles of
chairs had been set beneath this panelling, but they had been
ripped out and replaced with tall wooden cabinets. Between the
cabinets and the room's centre, set out on tables above the
chequered floor, were computers, and the neurologics of
computers, and tools used to disassemble, heal, or grow new
computers. There were mantelets and sulki grids and hologram
stands. Hanuman had recently become a collector of archaic and
unusual computers, which he had put into display cases as if
they were jewels. (In fact, one of these computers was a jewel,
an antique Yarkonan firestone whose lights had long since
dimmed.) Danlo walked around the display cases, looking inside.
He saw electronic computers, and an optical computer, and
computer cubes, chips, disks and even a computer whose graphics
were projected inside a clear diamond ball. Hanuman, it seemed,
was especially fond of his various mechanical computers. One
whole case was taken up with a difference engine of brass gears
and gleaming chromium switches. He opened another case and
removed a Japanese abacus, and he began snapping wooden beads
along various wires with a blur of his little fingers. He
showed Danlo two kinds of quantum computers, and a glowing gas
computer, and then he pointed at a brilliant Yarkonan tapestry
hanging on the wall, and he said, This is the showiest of
computers, of course. The Yarkonans embroider the logics and
circuitry directly into the fabric.'
 They chatted for a while about Bardo's refurbishing of the
cathedral and other things of little matter. Although Danlo
wanted to tell him of the pearl that he had discovered and of
his promise to marry Tamara, he could not. Their mutual wooing
of Tamara was like an open wound between them. It was like a
canker on an autist's face: out of politeness and
embarrassment, they refused to look at
713
this festering hurt or to comment on it, but they could not
forget it for a moment.
'You look well,' Hanuman said at last.
   'You ... you have shaved your head,' Danlo said softly. 'You
have sworn to wear the skullcap, yes?'
  Hanuman snapped his finger and began spinning red beads
around the wires of the abacus. He looked off above him, and
Danlo thought that he was not really looking into the sunlit,
open space of the dome, but rather into other spaces which
burned with a different kind of light. Covering most of
Hanuman's naked head was a gleaming skullcap, the kind the
cyber-shamans wear. It was a shell of clear diamond, inside of
which the purple neurologics had been woven to simulate the
branchings and wispy sub-branchings of human nerves. Hanuman's
entire head seemed to be wrapped in a network of electric
nerves. It was a showy thing, this master computer, and many
cyber-shamans loved displaying it, even though of all the
cetics, they have always been the most secretive.
 'We call it the clearface,' Hanuman said. He smiled, and his
face seemed to be all glittering teeth inside a ghastly,
glittering skull. 'Some people think it's silly for a man to
shave his head like a novice, but that's the only way it will
fit tightly enough.'
 Indeed, the clearface fit his head like a second skin. It had
been cast and moulded to conform with the bones of his skull. A
glue called gimuk held it in place; the glue and the constant
pressure of this profound computer had irritated his scalp, for
along the rim of the clearface, across his forehead and
temples, around his ears, the skin was red and inflamed.
 Danlo looked at him, trying to keep his eyes fixed on
Hanuman's eyes rather than on the clearface. 'I have heard that
only the higher grades of the cyber-shamans wear the skullcap
... continually.'
 'Are you asking if I've been initiated into the higher
grades?'
 714
   'I have heard there are grades ... that even cyber-shamans
of the higher grades know little about.'
 'Are you speaking of secret grades?'
   'Not quite ... secret,' Danlo said, and then he smiled. 'How
could they be secret if I have heard of them?'
 Hanuman looked at him but said nothing.
  'I have heard that there are neurosingers who use the
skullcap to interface other computers ... continually.'
 Hanuman smiled to himself as he looked up into the dome. His
eyes were bloodshot as if he had not been able to close them
for a long time. His eyes were frozen open, but they seemed
empty of normal sight. He stood motionless as a sleekit on the
snow, and all the while his hollow eyes haunted his face.
Danlo knew that he must be interfacing the skullcap, or
perhaps one of the room's many computers. Which one he
interfaced was impossible to determine. The skullcap – the
clearface – was like a window into the cybernetic spaces of
all common computers, and into many that were uncommon, as
well. Hanuman stared off into space, as eyeless as any scryer;
he might have been interfacing a quantum mechanical computer,
or the wall tapestry, or even the very walls themselves.
'Hanu, Hanu, what are you doing?'
  As if in answer, Hanuman turned his gaze to a computer in
the exact centre of the room. There, resting on a plain
shatterwood stand at the level of Danlo's eyes, was a black
crystal sphere. It was as large as the head of a walrus, and
Danlo immediately recognized it as a much larger version of
Hanuman's universal computer, the one that he had used to
create his universe of dolls.
 'Excuse me,' Hanuman said, 'I was only completing an
experiment.'
  Danlo turned his head left and right, looking for the square
table that Hanuman had kept in his room after his great
remembrance. But Danlo saw no such display table,
715
 nor any other kind of screen or monitor that might be used to
display the dolls.
  'I left the table at Bardo's house,' Hanuman said upon
reading Danlo's puzzled expression. He tapped the diamond
clearface covering his head. 'Now that I wear this, there's no
need for such vulgar displays.'
  Hanuman turned to look at the sulki grid against the wall.
He said, That is, there's no need for myself. But you'll want
to see how my dolls have evolved these last hundred days.'
 Without waiting to see if that was indeed what Danlo really
wanted, Hanuman nodded his head, and the sulki grid flared into
life. Instantly, the whole chapter house from the floor to the
dome above filled with glowing silver shapes the size of large
seals. These images of dolls were all around Danlo, floating
through the air, perching atop the cabinets, floating through
the cabinets and other objects of the room as if such
constructions of common matter could never impede beings made
of pure light. Again, he had to remind himself that the dolls
were only information structures stored in Hanuman's universal
computer; the hologram projected through the room was only a
representation of this artificial life.
'Please, no,' Danlo said. 'No more.'
 While Hanuman stood there motionless, Danlo jumped back as
one of the dolls darted through the air and hovered in front
of him. In the way this great silver being oriented itself
toward him, it seemed to be studying him. Although none of the
dolls had eyes or faces, as humans or even seals do, there was
something facelike about each of the dolls, as if each one
possessed a unique personality and expression. The patterns of
light composing the dolls were unique in each one, and the
shifting bands of silver blue and aquamarine seemed responsive
to stimuli that Danlo could only guess at. And each doll
seemed responsive to every other. The dolls twisted and
quivered, and Danlo imagined that he could see the very air
molecules vibrating
716
 as with speech or some other kind of information wave. He had
an eerie feeling that the dolls were talking with each other
in strange and complex ways, perhaps even discussing him or
laughing at him. Perhaps they were pitying him. Somehow, he
thought, the dolls were aware of all that occurred between him
and Hanuman. It horrified him to think that these dolls might
manifest themselves in any part of the real universe as easily
as Hanuman might enter theirs.
'Hanu ... please.'
 As suddenly as they had appeared, the dolls vanished. The
pretty lights that had made up the dolls were gone, and the
computers and cabinets stood out plainly in the unmoving air
and the chapter house suddenly seemed too dark, too quiet, too
real.
 'Have you ever wondered about memory?' Hanuman asked. These
dolls have evolved a perfect memory.'
  'A computer's memory of information ... is not the same as a
man's.'
'Are you sure?'
 Danlo rubbed his eye and said, 'I did not come here to see
your dolls.'
'Are you sure?' Hanuman repeated.
  'Once, we used to know each other's thoughts, almost without
talking.'
'Shall I tell you what you're thinking, Danlo?'
 Danlo shrugged his shoulders and said, 'If you would like.'
 He was aware of Hanuman's eyes picking over his face, and he
expected him to utter some witticism or piercing truth about
the paradoxical nature of his quest to become an asarya. But
Hanuman turned facing the centre of the room, and he said
nothing. Then Danlo became aware of his own mind, of his wild,
churning surface thoughts: he was praying that Hanuman would
look away from him and keep his silence.
'You used to know me as a friend, not as a cetic,' Danlo said.
717
 Hanuman stepped close to his universal computer, and he said
nothing.
  'And I used to know you,' Danlo continued. 'I thought I
always would.'
 Hanuman pressed his forehead to the gleaming black sphere,
and there was a clinking sound of crystal against the diamond
clearface, and still he said nothing.
'Hanu, Hanu – why did I ever come to this insane City?'
  At last, Hanuman deigned to speak, saying, 'If you hadn't
come to Neverness, I would have frozen to death in Lavi
Square.'
'Why speak of that now?'
'Because there's a life between us. There always will be.'
 'Yes... a life.'
  'And now there's something more between us,' Hanuman said.
This way of the gods that we've seen more clearly than anyone
else.'
 'But the Way of Ringess ... is not my way.'
'No?'
'No.'
 'Would you renounce the very religion you've helped create?'
'I? But what about you and Bardo, then?'
  'Let's never forget,' Hanuman said, 'that your remembrance
has been the inspiration of thousands.'
'But I– '
'Soon they will be millions.'
'So many– '
 'And someday, millions of millions. There's never any end to
humanity's swarms, is there?'
 With slow, tense steps, Danlo paced around the room. Finally,
after considering his words carefully, he drew up close to
Hanuman and said, The Way ... is not what it used to be.'
'Everything evolves, of course,' Hanuman agreed.
 'But now Bardo is practically selling memberships to the
godlings!'
718
'So?'
'You cannot buy remembrance.'
 'Perhaps not,' Hanuman said. 'But if the godlings don't
sacrifice something dear to themselves such as money, they
won't value the privilege of becoming Ringists.'
 'Privilege?' Danlo cried out. 'I thought the Way ... was
supposed to be a way for everyone.'
 'And it will be. It is. Only, for some of us, it will be a
more glorious way than for others.'
'I see.'
  Hanuman steepled his fingers beneath his chin and said,
'Some of us have been chosen to copy their remembrances;
others have not.'
'Who are these chosen, then?'
'Do you want to know their names?'
'Yes.'
  'Well, there's Bardo, of course. You, me, Thomas Rane.
Kolenya Mor.'
'And?'
  'And, as I'm sure you know, I've asked Tamara, too. And the
brothers Hur and seven others of the kalla fellowship. And
Surya has consented– '
'Surya Lal!'
'She's a brilliant woman, you should know.'
  'But she has opposed the kalla ceremony almost from the very
beginning!' Danlo said. 'I think she is afraid ... of the
memories.'
 'Nevertheless, it seems that she's had an important
remembrance.'
'Truly?'
 'Would you wish to judge, yourself, the truth of her
remembrance?'
 Danlo looked up into the dome, at the windows which had
fallen dark and reflective of the room's little lights. He
shook his head and asked, 'What ... remembrance?'
 'She's remembered a simple thing, really, a truth that should
be important to any who follow the Way: that
719
 someday a god would arise among human beings and lead us to
our destiny. This god's name is Mallory Ringess.'
'She says that she ... remembranced this?'
'Of course.'
'But how could she?'
 'She says that this is one of the racial memories of the
Ieldra.'
 'But the Ieldra,' Danlo said, 'abandoned this galaxy fifty
thousand years ago. How could they have known the name ... of
my father?'
  Hanuman looked at Danlo and smiled. 'Perhaps the Ieldra were
the greatest scryers of all time. Their memories: memories of
the future. You, yourself, have said that in deep remembrance,
there is no time.'
'That is true.'
 'Then the Ieldra must have carked all their memories, future
and past, into the human genome. It's there, coiled up in our
chromosomes, these brilliant memories. You've seen them, as
have I. What else are the Elder Eddas, if not the memories of
the gods?'
  Danlo walked past a few cabinets and rickety tables until he
came to the room's curved wall, which was thick and ornate with
granite panelling. He leaned against one of the false pillars
there. High above his head, the wind drove through the cracks
along the iron window frame and fell down over him like an icy
waterfall. The dense air had chilled the wall so thoroughly
that he instantly felt the coldness of it pierce the layers of
his kamelaika and his undergarments. He looked at Hanuman and
said, 'I think the Elder Eddas are something more than genetic
memory. The Eddas are ... something other.'
'What, then?'
'The One Memory, this life shimmering in all– '
 'The One Memory! Oh, Danlo, I think you're the only truly
religious person I know.'
Because his head was beginning to throb, Danlo rubbed
720
his eyes and temples. 'It is ironic you should say that. I
think I have finished ... with all religions.'
 Hanuman walked over to Danlo and stood facing him. 'Even
Ringism?'
  'Especially Ringism. There is no joy in it any more ... for
me.'
'No joy? You, of the great remembrance?'
 'The kalla ceremony,' Danlo said. 'It is empty ... of true
remembrance. It is like a thallow egg whose yolk has been
sucked out.'
'Which is why it has been disbanded.'
'Is that really why, Hanu?'
 'Well, tonight we'll have a new ceremony of remembrance.'
'Yes ... another ceremony.'
 Hanuman looked up suddenly, as if he had just seen a dagger
suspended above his head, and he told Danlo, 'It would be a
tragedy for you to leave the Way.'
'But I must.'
'Are you sure?'
'Yes.'
'And when did you make this silly decision?'
 Danlo did not want to speak, but his pride cried out that
truth was blessed and must be told, and so he said, 'Before I
came here tonight, I was not sure. I did not know ... what I
would do.'
'And now you know?'
'Yes.'
  'And what will Danlo the Wild do then?' Hanuman looked
straight into Danlo's face, but his eyes were far away. 'A
cetic wants to know.'
 With his hand pressed against his aching head, Danlo told
Hanuman that he would never attend another joyance nor any kind
of religious ceremony. However, each evening he would practise
the remembrancing art, privately, under Thomas Rane's guidance.
He would spend his days studying mathematics. It was still his
intention,
721
 he said, to join the second Vild mission and find a cure for
the great plague that had killed his people.
'You've accounted for all your time except your nights.'
  'You must know where I spend my nights,' Danlo said softly.
Then, because he had fallen so deeply into truth that evening,
he told Hanuman of the pearl and his betrothal to Tamara.
 This happy news did not seem to surprise Hanuman. He just
stood there, his eyes full of mockery, and full of pity, too.
'She'll never marry you, of course. Please believe me – I know
about these whores.'
 Neither Danlo nor Hanuman moved; the silence in the chapter
house was now oppressive and ominous, and it seemed that it
would never end.
  'I should go now,' Danlo finally said. The pressure inside
his head was sharp and intense; when he looked suddenly toward
the door, a quick pain sliced through his eye, deep into his
head.
  'Now I've offended you,' Hanuman said. 'I'm sorry – please
don't leave yet.'
 Danlo rubbed the scar along his forehead, saying nothing.
Then he started toward the door.
 'You can't just betray your friends like this!' Hanuman said.
 As if his muscles had been touched with an electric current,
Danlo whirled about and pointed his finger at Hanuman. 'You
say that?'
'If you leave the Way, you harm all of us.'
  Out of pure frustration, Danlo clawed the air, then clenched
his fists.
 'Well, whatever you do, please don't betray our secrets to
anyone.'
'A secret is a secret,' Danlo said.
  'Of course, but please don't speak to anyone about the Way.
Please don't tell anyone you've left us.'
  'You want me to keep ... a silence?'
 'Is that so hard to do?'
 722
  'Not so hard. So ... wrong.'
  Hanuman flashed Danlo a quick look, and he said, 'Don't let
your love of truth destroy everything you love.'
 'I do not know what you mean.'
  There was a moment of silence as Hanuman worked his eyes
over Danlo's face. 'You've already decided to speak against
us, haven't you?'
 'I ... do not know.'
'Please tell me the same truth you'd tell everyone else.'
'What truth?'
'The truth your face affirms and your lips deny.'
  Danlo sighed, then said, 'You must know what I will say.'
 'Yes, you'll keep our secrets, but you'll speak against us –
you'll tell everyone that Ringism has been corrupted beyond
redeeming. You're contemplating telling Tamara this half-truth
tonight. But you mustn't. You mustn't speak to Tamara about
what you've seen here. Please don't.'
'But we tell each other everything.'
 'If you tell her, you'll destroy her,' Hanuman said. His
voice had fallen deep and ragged, as it used to get after a
spell of coughing.
'You think it is so easy to destroy a person, then?'
 'Listen to me – Tamara is enchanted with the idea of creating
a religion after her own image. It's what she lives for.'
'No, you are wrong.'
'Please believe me. I've seen what I've seen.'
 'You are a cetic, and you have seen her face. But you have
never seen ... anything deeper.'
  'I'm a cetic,' Hanuman agreed. 'And it's as a cetic that
I'll tell you this: if you malign the Way to her, you'll
destroy whatever there is between you.'
  Danlo did not like the faraway look that fell over Hanuman
as he said this. He hated the paleness of Hanuman's eyes, the
self-absorption, pity and dread there. These, he thought, were
the attributes of a scryer who has seen some
723
tragic and inevitable future, not the silent face of a cetic.
  'I understand,' Danlo said. 'You would not want me to
alienate a ... courtesan.'
'Don't say anything to her, please.'
'I should go now,' Danlo said again.
  Hanuman smiled, and then he spoke, and his words were as
cool as quicksilver, 'But we haven't recorded your memories
yet.'
 'I... cannot let you do that.'
'Please, Danlo.'
'How can you ask me this?'
'Because you're my friend.'
 'Would a friend ask his friend ... what is impossible to do?'
  'You've had a great remembrance,' Hanuman said. 'I should
think you'd want to share it with others.'
'But it cannot be shared!'
'No?'
'No.'
'But if you could share your memories, would you?'
 'I ... do not know.'
  'Would you at least face one of our remembrancing computers?
Would you face the memories we've chosen to record?'
'Why?'
'To see for yourself.'
  Danlo rubbed the scar above his eye, then slowly nodded his
head. 'If you would like.'
'We'll need a heaume, then.'
  So saying, Hanuman crossed the room and stood in front of a
deep mahogany cabinet nearly twice his height. As he swung
open the doors, the hinges squeaked and groaned. Inside, at
the bottom of the cabinet, as Danlo could see, were many
skull-like heaumes stacked atop each other in a mound. They
looked like trophies collected by some ancient warlord.
Hanuman ignored these heaumes and turned his attention to the
many shelves of heaumes above
724
 them. His little fingers danced along a shelf of heaumes,
tapping over the silvery shells until he came to one that
apparently satisfied him. He nodded his head and used both his
hands to lift it up, and then he gave Danlo the heaume.
 'I have never seen one like this before,' Danlo said. He ran
his fingers across the heaume's curved, chromium surface. The
metal was quite cold; looking into its mirror finish, he could
see a distorted reflection of his face.
'What's wrong?' Hanuman asked.
  Danlo looked back and forth between Hanuman and the gleaming
heaume. He remembered that one of the first things a novice is
taught is never to put a strange heaume on his head.
 'This was made on Catava,' Hanuman told him. 'It's beautiful,
don't you think?'
 Just then, Danlo heard light footsteps along the corridor
outside the chapter house; he thought that someone must be
stalking closer to the room, perhaps to press his ear against
the door and eavesdrop on their conversation. Hanuman, intent
on examining the heaume's silvery striations, seemed not to
notice this faint sound. Then the door suddenly banged open,
and Bardo blundered inside. He wore a bright, formal, golden
robe and a gold ring around the little finger of his right
hand. His beard and hair had been freshly cut, combed and
oiled; he smelled of sihu perfume, the kind that he wore when
he wished to inspirit himself to lead some great ceremony. He
glanced at Danlo, then at Hanuman, and his voice came rolling
out like winter thunder: 'Haven't you copied his goddamned
memories yet?'
  'No,' Hanuman said. He seemed both surprised and dismayed to
see Bardo looming above him like a mountain about to explode.
For a moment, Danlo wondered if Hanuman had secretly summoned
Bardo to reinforce his arguments, but if there was any truth
written on his delicate, white face, clearly this could not be
so.
725
'Well?'
'Danlo doesn't want his memories copied.'
'By God, why not?'
'You should ask him that,' Hanuman said.
  Bardo pulled at his beard and looked at Danlo. His eyes were
soft and sad, and he asked, somewhat rhetorically, 'Why should
I have to stand here dreading you're about to tell me bad
things?'
  While Danlo explained his reasons for deciding to leave the
Way, taking care to choose words that would not give too much
offence or lay too much blame on others, Bardo walked over to
Hanuman and plucked the heaume away from him. He held it
cupped, upside-down, in one of his huge hands. The heaume's
smooth metal seemed welded to his fingers. 'You,' he said to
Danlo, 'every Ringess I've known – why do you have to be so
wilful?'
'I am sorry,' Danlo said.
  'Ah, I should have seen your disillusionment,' Bardo sighed.
'But I've been too damn busy.'
'I am sorry,' Danlo repeated.
  'Well, you can't simply abandon us. How can I persuade you
of the, ah, advantages of being a prophet among godlings?'
'I do not think you can,' Danlo said.
  'But have I explicated how great these advantages might
become?' Bardo turned the heaume around and around slowly
between his fingers. 'Have I ... By God, what's this?'
  His great voice suddenly filled the room as he stabbed his
finger against the base of the heaume. There, stamped into the
curved band of metal that would have fit over the back of
Danlo's neck, was the seal of the Cybernetic Reformed Churches:
a simple string of Edic lights twisted once so as to resemble a
figure eight lying on its side.
'This isn't one of our heaumes!' Bardo shouted.
  Hanuman smiled, then said, 'No, it's a cleansing heaume.'
726

  'A cleansing heaume! Why do you have a cleansing heaume?'
  'It's silly of me, but I collect such things,' Hanuman said
smoothly. He moved over to a row of ten steel cabinets. He
opened the door of the first cabinet. Inside were ten shelves
and ten heaumes lined up on each shelf. Each heaume appeared
identical to the cleansing heaume that Hanuman held in his
hands.
  'But these are our remembrancing heaumes!' Bardo said,
pointing.
 'They do look alike,' Hanuman said. He lifted out one of the
remembrancing heaumes and tucked it into the crook of his right
arm. He carried it over to Danlo and Bardo. 'But of course
there's no insignia on the remembrancing heaumes.'
  Bardo grabbed the remembrancing heaume away from Hanuman. He
chewed his moustache as he held the heaume up to the light of
the flame globe, and he traced his finger over its base. As
Danlo could see, the smooth metal bore neither stamp nor seal
of any Cybernetic church.
  'We bought a thousand of these from the Catavan Architects,'
Bardo admitted to Danlo. 'And we've ordered ten thousand more.'
  Danlo looked back and forth between the two heaumes in
Bardo's hands; they seemed more alike each other than any two
thallow eggs taken from the same nest. He looked at Hanuman,
smiling his empty smile, and he thought of the old saying:
'Catava makes the holiest computers.'
 'The damn Architects like to mark everything they make, but
we've bribed them to leave their seal off these computers,'
Bardo said. 'Naturally, it would be best if the godlings didn't
suspect they were wearing Architect heaumes.'
  Danlo paid scant attention to his words. He was staring at
Hanuman now, and Hanuman was staring at him; while Bardo
cleared his throat and muttered something to
727
 himself about the high cost of dealing with Architects, Danlo
and Hanuman locked eyes together in a way they had not done for
a long time.
  Then Bardo pointed his chin at Hanuman and demanded, 'Why
did you design these heaumes thusly?'
  'As a joke, of course,' Hanuman said. His eyes were as pale
as chalk ice. As pale, Danlo thought, and as cold and clouded.
'A joke!'
  'Well, the Architects use the cleansing heaumes to mutilate
people's memories. I thought it would be ironic to design a
similar-seeming computer. In order to give the people the
deepest memories in the universe.'
  In the time it took for Danlo's heart to beat nine times,
nobody spoke. Then Hanuman continued, 'I was only going to show
Danlo the difference between these heaumes.'
Hanu, Hanu, are you telling the truth?
  Danlo watched Hanuman watching him, and his eyes ached at
the coldness he saw there, and he did not know the answer to
this question. A voice inside him cried that Hanuman would
never harm him, that it was unthinkable Hanuman should ever
place a cleansing heaume upon his head. No friend could do this
to another, no matter if their friendship were cracking like
old sea ice which has borne a heavy weight too long.
Oh, Hanu, Hanu.
  As Danlo gazed at his best and deepest friend, he thought it
was possible that Hanuman, himself, did not know what he had
intended to do.
  'Ahhh,' Bardo said. He tossed the cleansing heaume directly
at Hanuman's face, and he seemed startled at the quickness of
Hanuman's hands jerking up to catch it. 'You should lock this
away with your other collectibles. It wouldn't do for some poor
godling to put this on her head by mistake.'
While Hanuman locked the cleansing heaume in one of
728
 his cabinets, Danlo glanced at Bardo. His fat cheeks were
puffed out into something resembling a smile. Clearly, Bardo
accepted Hanuman's explanation, though it was also very clear
that Hanuman's 'joke' had disturbed him. He is afraid of
Hanuman, Danlo thought Afraid for himself.
  'Now,' Bardo said to Danlo as he drummed his fingers along
the crown of the remembrancing heaume, 'what we would like
from you is your sense of the Eddas. We'd especially like to
preserve the, ah, mystical element of your remembrance.'
  Danlo noticed that Hanuman was standing next to his
universal computer; his head was rigid as if he were deep in
thought. Danlo turned back to Bardo and said, 'Even if you
could copy the exact state of my mind, now, here ... it would
not help you. Tonight I am far from any of the remembrancing
attitudes.'
'Well, I don't suppose that really matters,' Bardo said.
  'But only in the One Memory, in the experience of it, in the
now-moment when time comes to a stop ... it is only during
remembrance that there is any mystical element worth
preserving.'
  'So you think you know what's worth preserving and what's
not?'
  'All I have now,' Danlo said, 'is a memory of the Eddas. A
memory ... of the One Memory.'
'Ah, but who has a finer memory of this state than you?'
  Danlo looked over at Hanuman, and he thought that he had a
fiercer memory of his remembrance, if not a finer one. 'Nothing
in my memory can bring anyone closer to the Eddas,' Danlo said.
 'Then why have you spoken so freely of your remembrance?'
 'I ... do not know.'
  Bardo rubbed his beard and said, 'You've spoken so
eloquently, too – it's because you have this habit of telling
the truth, even to those who don't deserve it. Will you listen
to a friend who's only slightly less eloquent than
729
 yourself? Words are like jewels in the night. Words are like
constellations of stars pointing the way when one is lost.
Words can evoke the mystical feeling, as I well know from
listening too attentively to your goddamned words. I, myself,
mistrust this feeling, as you must know, but others crave it.
For them, your words are golden. It's your words we want,
Little Fellow. Hanuman tells me you have a nearly perfect
memory for every word you've ever spoken.'
  From a pocket in his robe Bardo removed a golden clock
studded with twenty-five diamonds, a little piece of forbidden
technology of a kind that had proliferated in the City since
the Timekeeper's demise. He held up his hand and motioned
Hanuman nearer. He gave Hanuman the remembrancing heaume and
said to him, 'We've a ceremony to lead in less than two hours.
I haven't time to persuade Danlo to copy his memories. You
persuade him. Please.'
  He turned to Danlo, reached out and rumpled his hair. 'And
if he fails to illuminate you as to the advantages of doing
what you should do, I'll have to speak with you privately. Do
you understand? Good. Well, now, I must attend the placement of
the sulki grids. With all the harassment the Order has been
inflicting upon us, we'll have to hide them – or at least be
more discreet.'
  So saying, he bowed perfunctorily and then sauntered out of
the room. After the door had banged shut, Danlo and Hanuman
were left alone with each other.
  Hanuman held the remembrancing heaume out to Danlo; although
he spoke not a word, his eyes beckoned as if to say: Don't you
trust me? Or more pointedly: Can it be that Danlo the Wild is
afraid of a computer?
  In truth, Danlo was afraid of computers, and it was
precisely because of this fear (and out of his friendship for
Hanuman) that he forced himself to take the heaume. With a
quick motion, he pulled the heaume over his head, trying to
smooth his hair out of the way as the chromium
730
 ear pieces squeezed over his temples. The fit was not good.
His hair, though swept back behind his neck, was too thick and
unruly to allow a tight fit between the logic silk and his
skull. Hanuman told him that it did not really matter, that the
silks lining the remembrancing heaumes generated a more
powerful field than did common silks. Danlo, who had always had
misgivings about encasing his brain in any kind of logic field,
powerful or weak, was not comforted by this news. Indeed, in
what he was doing, there was no comfort at all. The base of the
heaume cut against the back of his neck, compressing the
muscles and arteries there, aggravating the pain in his head.
Even though the interior of his eyes throbbed so sharply he
could hardly see, he looked at Hanuman and smiled. He nodded
once, then shut his eyes as he waited for the computer to fill
him with remembrance.
 The images, when they came, were much like those of any other
surreality or simulation. Interfacing the memories that Hanuman
had recorded was something like entering a library's cybernetic
spaces – even more like being part of a fabulist's drama. In
fact, in the design of the remembrancing program, Hanuman had
solicited the aid of both a cartoonist and a master fabulist.
It amazed Danlo to witness the great events from his father's
life. As if he were a jellyfish floating in a tropical sea, he
'followed' his father and 'watched' as the Agathanians touched
Mallory Ringess' proud and noble face and disassembled his
ruined brain, neuron by bloody neuron, and healed him, and
remade him into a man who might become a god; he 'listened' to
private conversations between Mallory Ringess and Bardo; he
'walked' across a cold beach noisy with barking seals, and he
listened to these two great men speak of programming the self,
of mastering the biological programs that lead to rage, hatred,
and ultimately, death. Everything about the life of the
Ringess, according to the memories that Danlo reviewed, was a
way of escaping the meaninglessness of death.
731
The highest art is self-creation.
 The heaume infused remembered words into Danlo's inner ear,
and he marvelled that his father's voice was much like his own,
or rather, like his voice might someday become: deep, rich,
tender, passionate, and pained. The irony in this voice amused
him; its wilful, fated quality brought to mind remembrances of
faraway stars and galactic wonders (and tragedies) he had never
seen. The image of his father inside him spoke of compassion,
with compassion, and each of his noble words was an inspiration
and a pleasure to hear. It was Danlo's way to cherish pleasure
as an indicator of good and blessed things, but this pleasure
he mistrusted as he did the morasha, the deadly, crumbling snow
that covers an invisible crevasse. He knew too much about
cetics and their arts. He knew too well how the cyber-shamans
use computers to control the brain. And now, when he looked
away from the dark, compelling image of his father – when he
looked into his own shimmering awareness – he could almost see
the heaume's manipulation of his mind. He could feel it, as
exaltation and quick euphoria, the spray of endorphins through
his brain's neurons. Timed to each of his father's perfect
words (and at each mention of the name 'Ringess') he
experienced a moment of opiate intoxication. The heaume
stimulated the release of peptides and other twisted-up
proteins specific to certain moods. Standing beneath this hard
shell of metal that cut against his spinal cord, he fell
through a quick succession of moods: wonder, awe, curiosity,
even joy. He astonished himself laughing out with joy so hard
that tears came to his eyes and he could hardly keep his feet.
Then came other, deeper moods: the mystic upwelling of the
serotonin flows, cool, quick, and sublime; and the rush of
noradrenalin that brought a marvellous clarity and
concentration, opening him to new ways of seeing things,
speeding up his mind.
  The image of God is found essentially and personally in all
humankind. Each possesses it whole,
732
 entire and undivided, and all together not more than one
alone.
  It came to him, suddenly, that he could understand great
things. Godly things. There was no lack of things to be
understood and remembered. Hanuman and Bardo had recorded many
images, words, ancient writings, musics, and simulated
miracles – as well as doctrines they had invented to explain
how one man had become a god, and how others might join him in
godhood. Danlo should have absorbed this information easily,
as dry snow sucks up water. His brain had been beautifully
prepared for such veneration and false remembrance. Even now,
the heaume was pulling at his neurons, programming his brain
stem to pump out ever more noradrenaline and other chemicals
that would enhance his memory. Only, his memory needed no
enhancement. In truth, because he had been born with such a
clear and deep memory, it was always easier for him to
remember than to forget. To purge from his mind anything at
all, even such minutiae as the pattern of pimples on Pedar's
face the night that he had been killed, always required from
him a tremendous act of will. (As well as the use of certain
techniques that Thomas Rane had taught him.) It was this will
and these mental tricks that now inoculated him against the
stream of images pouring into his brain. Thus, with smiling
lips and tightly closed eyes, he faced the remembrancing
heaume gladly, and he was not afraid of falling into the trap
that Hanuman had prepared for him.
  Man is a rope, tied between beast and god – a rope over a
bottomless crevasse.
 Of course, Hanuman was not the first to use mind-machines to
wash the brain with religious sentiments and dogma. Nearly
three thousand years earlier, Nikolos Daru Ede had authored the
first four books of The Algorithms, and in many ways, Hanuman's
interpretation of the Elder Eddas copied the architecture of
this monumental work. Hanuman's 'Eddas' as he called them, were
structured
733
 even more tightly than the Visions or the Iterations or any of
the later books of The Algorithms. In putting on a
remembrancing heaume, as Danlo found, there was little freedom
of movement among the recorded memories. In this respect, it
was nearly the opposite of facing a library's cybernetic space:
there was no soaring among the lovely information storms and
crystalline knowledge structures, no true sense of fractality
or fugue or sudden discoveries that the librarians call
gestalt. He did not need his shih sense to find his way among
the images that Hanuman had assembled into movements and
transhuman dramas, because a way had already been prepared for
him. Programmed for him. It was being programmed now, as he
smiled and sweated beneath the hard silver heaume.
  You have made your way from worm to man, and in you is still
worm. Once you were apes, and even now, man is more ape than
any ape.
  He opened his eyes, and he faced away from the remembrancing
heaume. It was a difficult thing to do. Near him stood Hanuman
with his tight lips and unseeing eyes. Around Hanuman's shaved
head, the clearface was lit up, thousands of strands of
neurologics glowing bright purple. Danlo realized that Hanuman
had chosen certain Eddas to infuse into his brain; very
probably Hanuman was editing these memories moment by moment.
It occurred to Danlo that the program calling up the memories,
whether in private sessions such as this or in mass public
ceremonies, would be rewritten to provide each person's
'remembrance'. And it would always be Hanuman (or Bardo or some
other cyber-shaman) who wrote these programs.
  The universe is a machine for the production of .
 The memories that came to him then were not quite like the
Elder Eddas, not like true remembrance as he had experienced
it. They were other people's memories. They were words and
pictures that a fabulist had put together. All these memories
had come from people whom Danlo
734
 knew very well, and he found that Bardo and Surya Lal and
others had stamped them with their individual concerns and
conceits, much as a tiger leaves distinctive prints in the
snow. There was one 'Edda', cold and hard and clear, that he
was sure Thomas Rane must have remembered. Danlo could see this
memory as an image just behind his closed eyelids, where points
of red and blue light sparkled across his visual field. There,
an image of an organism appeared. It was as vast and beautiful
as a whale, only it lived far above the seas of any planet, and
its skin shone like gold against the blackness of space.
Mathematical formulae appeared, then, indicating that for
evolving organisms adapting themselves to new environments, the
rate of energy metabolism varies according to the square of the
temperature. .
  Because low temperature favours order, the coldest climates
are potentially the most hospitable for complex forms of life.
  Whole sequences of memories came quickly now: Old Earth
before the agricultural holocaust, Bardo's vision of a world of
primeval green forests, blue oceans, and white clouds as pure
as snow; Hanuman's prophecy of the dead god in the 18th Deva
Cluster and his account of the great war that the gods waged
across the stars; there was even something from Danlo's first
remembrance, words that he had spoken immediately afterward:
'By none but a god shall a god be worshipped, and we are all
potentially gods.' He laughed silently to himself because he
knew he had never uttered the phrase: 'and we are all
potentially gods'. He thought that Bardo or Hanuman must have
added on this bit of doctrine, as a virus adds new information
to a computer program, or to a living cell. He laughed to see
his memory of the Elder Eddas embroidered so easily, and then
he shook his head and ground his teeth in despair.
  It was the Agathanians who first recognized Mallory Ringess
as a potential god. They healed him of his mortal wound and
showed him the path
735
 toward the infinite things. The Ringess made himself into a
god, and then he went out to heal the universe. Someday, he
will return to Neverness.
 Danlo might have thrown off the heaume and fled from the
room, then, but a sudden image compelled his attention: his
father as a noble-looking young man, with his black and red
hair, the strong, predatory face, the cold blue eyes that
seemed to grow larger as they fixed on the stars above
Neverness. It was a famous, noble pose out of the mind of some
fabulist, only now this glittering image filled Danlo's mind,
and it transformed itself into something vast and glorious,
even as Danlo clamped his teeth together so that his jaw
muscles popped in sudden pain. He looked behind his eyes,
inside himself where his father's image was becoming his own;
it was the image he might see reflected in a common silvered
mirror. Hanuman, he guessed, was playing with the heaume's
program, morphing and melding Danlo's bearded face with that of
his father, much as a cartoonist blends together different
visages to invent new characters. The eyes of this new image
were dark blue like liquid jewels; soon they had grown huge and
mysterious as moons. His eyes were blue-black windows full of
stars, opening outward in every direction, drinking in all the
universe.
  Each man, woman, and child is a star, and all human beings
can shine with the light of gods.
 Now it comes, Danlo thought. Now he will use all his skills
to spring the trap he has prepared.
 The path toward godhood lies in remembrancing the Elder Eddas
and following the Way of the Ringess.
  The memories flickered inside so quickly that they would
have overwhelmed him if he hadn't used his time sense to speed
up his mind. As if he were floating in the pit of a lightship
in deep space, almost by instinct, he fell into slowtime and
he reached out with his thoughts to enter the computer's
electron flows. Single moments of
736
time seemed to come apart and last forever, as a silken strand
from a worm's cocoon unravels endlessly. He entered into
electronic samadhi, and the computer's memories became his
memories, and his mind raced along strands of endless circuitry
all frenzied and electric with information. He should not have
been able to do this. No heaume should have been programmed to
allow this kind of dangerous merging. Many were the pilots who
had lost themselves into their computers. (Almost as many as
the poor harijan who put illegal mind machines on their heads
and die forever to the outside world.) Danlo loved mystical
states of consciousness – even those induced by computers – and
there had been a time in his life when he had sought such
ecstasies wherever he could. He thought he understood the
nature of Hanuman's trap; he thought that Hanuman was tempting
him with the promise of easy electronic samadhi, as if to say:
Behold, each time you go beneath my heaumes, all memory and
mind will be yours. For an endless moment of time, this seemed
to be true. His mind seemed to extend itself, to become one
with that of the computer. To become the computer. He, himself,
whoever he really was, made no effort to run the computer's
programs. He let himself be swept away by the ecstasy of pure
computation. His awareness spread out into a nearly infinite
field of on-or-off voltages, trillions of sparks of light
twinkling in total blackness. Brilliant patterns formed
themselves up momentarily only to be broken apart an instant
later and replaced with others just as beautiful. All
computation was the asking of a single, eternal question: yes
or no? This question was asked about every aspect of shape,
colour, sound, number, idea or emotion. He asked himself this
question a million million times each second, yes or no, and
his computational self coded information into memories, the
pattern of yeses and noes making the pictures that were
memories. Mechanically, something inside moved these memories
from one place to another, sorting, comparing, negating, adding
memory
737
 to memory so quickly that they filled an entire memory space.
Thus he could see Hanuman's Eddas from a coign of vantage which
was wholly new; he gazed at these bright memories as if he were
a god peering through a microscope at all the features of the
world, all at once, and he let his vast, new mind make sense of
all that he beheld. It came to him that he had never understood
so many things. He wondered if the heaume were faced with some
larger computer, or perhaps whole arrays of computers that
Hanuman had hidden from view. As he had done many times before,
he wondered at the nature of the mind-computer interface, the
very nature of mind itself.
 Hanu, Hanu, how is it possible that the mind can know more
than itself?
  He felt the blood racing through the arteries of his throat,
and he knew much about other people's memories that he had
thought it was impossible to know. He wondered, then, if he
truly might copy something of his great remembrance into
Hanuman's heaume; he wondered if together they might create a
remarkable likeness of the Elder Eddas.
  Gods create; creation is everything, and you are God.
  This calling to create, he thought, was the whole of his
temptation; he thought he could reach out and touch the icy,
translucent walls of Hanuman's trap, and if necessary, break
his way out at will. He thought he had seen all there was to
see. And then the heaume looked through his mind and touched it
with a pale fire. There was a sudden frenzy of
neurotransmitters that made his brain cells rush with wild,
electro-chemical storms. It was a pleasure beyond pleasure, a
greater ecstasy of the mind than anything he had ever known. He
stood there swaying, drunk with this mind fire, and there came
a moment of illumination so intense it seemed his interior
world had been lit up by a flash of lightning.
 Where is the lightning to lick you with its tongue? Where is
the frenzy with which you should be inocu-
738
lated? Behold, I teach you the god within: he is this
lightning, he is this frenzy.
  He stumbled about blindly, afraid that he might fall over
and knock into one of Hanuman's cabinets. He struggled to
control his breathing, to calm the fiery waves of bliss
pounding through his brain.
 So this is the real electronic samadhi, he thought. The
samadhi that the cyber-shamans keep for themselves.
  As he grimaced and ground his teeth against the intense
pleasure of the moment, he thought that nothing in the universe
could be so marvellous as this samadhi. And then, as if a light
had been turned off, he fell out of samadhi and stood there
panting. He remembered something that he should never have
forgotten. He remembered the true Elder Eddas. True remembrance
was not the same as entering electronic samadhi. The sudden
heaven of the cyber-shamans was like standing at the top of a
mountain and looking down to see each crack and glittering
fleck of mica in every pebble and stone in the world; it was
seeing broadly and more intensely, the analysis of each
wavelength of light reflected off all the crevasses and
snowflakes and ice, out to where the world curves off into
infinity. But true remembrance was like looking inside all
things, into the interior light that makes all things reach out
toward life. True remembrance was being lightning itself, not
merely being dazzled by its flash. He remembered, for a moment,
what it was like to see clearly and deeply, to be one's deepest
self, and then he thought back upon something that Old Father
had once said: Surfaces glitter intelligible lies; the depths
inside blaze with unintelligible truths. And surely Hanuman
must have known this. He must have known that it was only
himself he had trapped in his glittering cybernetic heaven.
  'No, Hanu, this is not the true Eddas – it is only a
simulation,' Danlo said aloud. His words vibrated between the
heaume and the bones of his head. To him, his voice sounded too
tender, too passionate, too pained. He should
739
 have taken off the heaume immediately but instead he opened
his eyes to look at Hanuman.
 He saw only blackness. For a moment, he was light-headed and
disoriented and sightless in his mind. He felt his brain fall
electric and strange, tingling with an aura of sick
anticipation. And then suddenly there was light. That is, he
was blinded by a stroke of lightning that tore straight through
his eyes to the back of his brain. Lightning is always just
lightning, but this time he felt the heat of it rather than the
illumination. Raging through his brain cells was a storm of
neurotransmitters, dopamine and taurine and norepinephrine,
this time of a slightly different concentration and mixture
than before. This time, there were no beautiful visions; there
was no sense of making connections with a mind greater than his
own; there was no pleasure, but only pain. All the pain in the
world.
  'Hanu, Hanu!' he cried out, but no one seemed to hear him.
He knew that it was only Hanuman who programmed these chemicals
of consciousness; he knew that he might escape this torturous
interior landscape merely by facing away from the computer. And
yet he could not face away. He felt himself caught, as in a
whirlwind of flames, a hideous space more akin to an epileptic
fit or madness than it was to any kind of samadhi. He threw his
hands to his head then and bruised his fingertips against the
hard metal heaume. As if a giant hammer had smashed both his
knees, he fell writhing to the floor. He cracked his elbow
against the floor tiles and bit his tongue, but the agony of
bruised bone was nothing against the fire inside his head. He
burned with the dread and despair of utter neverness, all the
neurons of his brain, all the cells of his body. He trembled to
tear himself into a trillion bits and parts, to scatter every
burning piece of himself in the icy sea, if only this would
extinguish the terrible fire. But the fire grew hotter and
hotter, and he burned in the pain of himself, a pain inside
pain that would never end.
Danlo, Danlo, you must wish to consume yourself
740
in your own flame: how could you wish to become new unless you
had first become ashes?
 All things, however, must finally end. Danlo managed to claw
the heaume off his head, and he lay crumpled on the floor,
sweating and panting. He became aware of Hanuman, who was
kneeling above him. Hanuman looked down at Danlo as he grasped
a folded white linen and wiped the blood from Danlo's lips. He
looked into Danlo's eyes and made sure that Danlo had returned
to an even consciousness, and then he helped him to sit up. He
hurried to ease himself away from Danlo, to stand and keep a
proper space between them. His hand was trembling, slightly,
as he gave the linen into Danlo's hand and said, 'Here, you've
bitten your tongue.'
 'Oh,' Danlo said. He used the linen to clean his mouth. His
tongue was raw and bleeding and he could hardly speak. 'Why
did you do that, Hanu?'
  Hanuman stood close by, fingering the diamond clearface on
his head. He bent down to pick up the heaume that Danlo had
taken off. He looked into its shiny chromium surface, which
was now scratched and dented. Then he dropped his eyes and
smiled at Danlo coldly. 'This was only a simulation, too,' he
said. 'Would you give the people the true Eddas?'
  Danlo looked up at Hanuman, and the muscles along the back
of his neck were stiff and aching. For the first time, he could
almost see Hanuman's real pain. Just as electronic samadhi was
only a glittering reflection upon the surface of the One
Memory, the fiery simulation that had raged through Danlo's
brain was only a shadow of what Hanuman must have felt the
night of his first remembrance.
Oh Hanu, Hanu, I truly did not know.
 Danlo inclined his head toward the heaume that Hanuman was
holding. He said, 'I did not know the memories ... would be so
consuming.'
Hanuman was still smiling, but there was no humour in
741
him. 'It's a clever program. Lord Pall helped design the
heaumes, you should know.'
  'But he has been against the Way from the very beginning!'
'That's true,' Hanuman said.
  'You have made an accommodation with him? With the Order?'
  'We've reasoned with him,' Hanuman said. 'We've shown him
that it would be silly to continue this ill feeling between the
Order and the Way.'
 'I ... see.'
  'Lord Pall is the greatest of cetics. He's taught me much of
what I know.'
'Have you suborned him or has he suborned you?'
 'No one has suborned anyone,' Hanuman said. 'We've merely
reasoned with the greatest lord of the Tetrad.'
  Danlo rubbed his elbow and asked, 'But what of Lord Ciceron,
then?'
  'I'm sure that Lord Pall will reason with Lord Ciceron.
They're both reasonable men.'
'I see.'
  'It's quite reasonable, don't you think, that all Ordermen
should be allowed remembrance?'
  After rubbing his neck, Danlo pointed at the heaume. That is
no remembrance,' he said.
  'No? But we've given the people the best of the Elder
Eddas.'
'Your Eddas,' Danlo said. 'Your interpretation of them.'
  'In truth, it's Bardo who's authored most of our doctrines.
I've merely edited the memories to fit these doctrines.'
'But what about your remembrance, Hanu?'
  Hanuman drew his finger along the inflamed skin of his
forehead that edged the clearface and said, 'We'll give them
my words from the Fire Sermon. That should be enough. There's
no need to torture the poor people.'
'As you tortured me?'
742
  'I only wanted to show you that the memories we copy into
the heaume must be selected carefully. I'm sorry if I caused
you any pain.'
Danlo looked at him and said, 'It does not matter.'
  'We must give the godlings the best memories, not the
worst.'
  'And you would sweeten these memories with electronic
samadhi, yes?'
'It would give them something of the mystical.'
'Yes, something,' Danlo said.
  'Please don't look at me that way,' Hanuman said. 'You
should know, too great a pleasure is as dangerous as too much
pain.'
 'Dangerous ... to whom?'
  'Dangerous to us, of course. Dangerous to the godlings.
Which is why we must control these remembrances.'
  'But you are not just controlling, Hanu. You are making a
counterfeit of true remembrance.'
  'What's true, then?' Hanuman asked. 'Do you mean your vision
of what you call the One Memory? How can we make people see
that? Not everyone has your talent for miracles, you should
know.'
  Danlo touched the feather dangling from his hair, and he
said, 'I believe ... that everyone does.'
  'No, they don't, which is why we must give them your words,
your memories, your understanding. We'll even give them a
little cybernetic samadhi – we'll give them a taste for the
miraculous.'
  'No,' Danlo said, 'you will give them sweetness instead of
honey; glitter instead of gold. Your simulation of the Eddas
... will never be real.'
  Now Hanuman's smile was no longer empty; now his face was
full of cold, cruel amusement. 'But no one wants reality,' he
said. 'Reality is much too real – why else do you think people
always hate anyone who'd show them the truth?'
Seeing that Danlo made no move to stand up, Hanuman
743
knelt down in front of him and sat back on his heels, politely
and quite formally. He held his little hands folded in his lap
as he talked of people's need to enter deeper modes of
consciousness and go beyond themselves – but not too deep or
too far beyond. He told Danlo that most people, when they knelt
beneath the remembrancing heaumes, would be satisfied with only
the slightest taste of cybernetic samadhi. It was his duty, he
said, to measure out this bliss, much as a chef carefully adds
garlic essence to a tableful of frying kurmash. Danlo thought
he was both cynical and sincere, too aware of the darkness that
everywhere permeated the universe and yet strangely innocent,
almost like a bright-eyed altar boy who stands before the Edic
lights at a vastening ceremony and is forced to ponder
mysteries he is too young to comprehend. Danlo sat there
listening, and the floor beneath him was cold as ice. There was
something eerie and foreboding about them sitting together on
uncovered floorstones, while the wind blew sheets of spindrift
against the windows and screamed through the cathedral's
spires. These sounds sifted through stone walls into the open
spaces of the chapter house; there were other sounds, too:
quick steps up and down the hallway outside the door; excited,
muffled voices; swishing silk. In the distance, far above the
cathedral and the City, the thunder of rockets fell deep and
smothered out of the night. Listening to the lightships leaving
Neverness for the stars near the Vild, Danlo fell into
remembrance. After a while, he pulled out his shakuhachi and
held it lightly in his hands. He held it to his lips, but he
did not play it. Hanuman eyed this length of bamboo with
longing and fear, and hatred, too. He hated Danlo's ease with
mystical music, just as he obviously hated it when Danlo told
him that the imminent remembrancing ceremony was a betrayal of
everything natural and blessed. Danlo regretted the rebuke in
his own voice, for he still clove to the Fravashi ideal of
becoming a perfect mirror of all things, and he would have
liked to have reflected the best part of
744
 Hanuman's selfness, not the worst. But his higher duty was to
truth, or so he thought, and thus he spoke of the great wrong
that Hanuman and Bardo were about to inflict upon the people
of the City. He spoke of electronic samadhi, of how the yogin
had coined this expression – derisively – to refer to an
artificial state that merely imitated true samadhi. Because he
wanted to lay open his heart, he admitted that he cherished
electronic samadhi, for what it was, but he also warned that
using it to facilitate the veneration of Hanuman's Eddas was
the worst kind of manipulation, akin to sidling someone's DNA
and fashioning viruses with which to infect the brain.
  'It is shaida to give children sweet things,' Danlo said,
'ail the while knowing ... that it will ruin their hunger for
what is truly blessed.'
  And what was most blessed, according to Danlo, was the One
Memory, this marvellous shimmering consciousness that could
never be simulated because it was not an experience of the
senses, nor a mentation, nor any emotion; it was neither a
subjective ecstasy of the mind nor the vistas of the objective
universe which the gods observe when they open their vast,
ancient eyes. The One Memory, Danlo said, was the natural state
where every atom of one's body 'remembers' its connection with
all the elements of the universe. Thus reality (and truth) is
something created between the universe and each living thing.
  For what seemed a long while, Danlo sat there in the shadow
of a computer cabinet, talking about the mystery of memory.
Hanuman's eyes were like pools of pale blue fire burning out of
the darkness; he watched Danlo with an intensity that
annihilated all time, and yet they were both aware that time
was passing too quickly, that the appointed hour of the new
remembrancing ceremony was drawing nearer. Everything about
this exchange of urgent words had the bittersweet thrill of a
last conversation. Danlo saw that the more he spoke of the One
Memory, the more uneasy and desperate Hanuman became. Soon
745
 the fire in Hanuman's eyes quickened to a terrible
apprehension. There was a falling away of years from his face.
His fine cheeks, usually so pale and hollow, were now bright
with blood. He squinted in pain as if he were coming into the
moment when he had first beheld the sun. He might have been a
child again reliving his fear and love of light. His mouth
opened in what was almost a scream; he threw his hand up
against his tightened brows, shielding his eyes from Danlo's
eyes, from the look of compassion that Danlo flashed him. How
he hates to be loved, Danlo thought. In truth, Hanuman hated
Danlo's love of remembrance, his love of life, this rare and
wild love that Danlo himself called anasala. Above all other
things, Hanuman hated the naturalness with which Danlo opened
himself to the One Memory. And so, because he had found the
part of Danlo that he could hate, sincerely and utterly, he
suddenly turned away from Danlo. He sat like a statue of a
neurosinger, still and remote, staring into himself. Around his
head, the clearface was all glittering lights and hard,
reflective surfaces. This diamond shell cut him off from any
words or compassion that Danlo might have given him. Hanuman
retreated into the private universe that only he could know,
and Danlo hated him for isolating himself this way. Danlo
looked at Hanuman's smooth, silent face, and now he could see
only their hatred for each other. Since the day of their first
meeting, these hatreds had always been present and growing, but
now, like drillworms chewing free of the body when an infected
hibakusha has died, their darker passions emerged into the
light for them both to see.
  He burns and he burns, but he hates burning alone.
    Danlo suddenly understood Hanuman's deeper reasons for
taking him into such a hellish simulation of remembrance; he
felt too keenly the twisted compassion that Hanuman bore for
him and bound them to a single fate. He closed his eyes then,
remembering something that Tamara had said to him: that Hanuman
would always destroy
746
 the object of his compassion before losing himself in bondage
to it.
 When he could stand it no longer, Danlo sprang to his feet
and said, 'I should go.'
 Hanuman stood up, too, and he faced Danlo. In his left hand,
he gripped the remembrancing heaume. He bowed to it and asked,
'Will you help me?'
  Something in Hanuman's voice made Danlo suspect that he was
being asked to do much more than merely record his memories.
In Hanuman's eyes, there was a dread of some great event or
crime yet to be committed, and so Danlo shook his head and
whispered, 'No ... I cannot.'
'Please, Danlo.'
  'No,' Danlo said, and his own voice was full of dread too.
 Hanuman's face emptied of all hope, but one more time he
looked at Danlo and asked, 'Will you help me do what must be
done?'
 'No,' Danlo said, and after he had spoken there was a silence
almost without end.
  'You should go now,' Hanuman finally said. His face was
drained of all emotion, as dead as a moon. 'Please, go.'
  Danlo hesitated a moment, then said, 'Goodbye, Hanu. I wish
you well.'
 He almost ran to the door, but before he could open it,
Hanuman called out, 'You should be careful of the truth, you
know. Bad things always happen to those who think they must
bring the truth.'
  Without plan or destination, Danlo left the chapter house
and walked back through the long corridors into the cathedral.
He passed several godlings who were busy making errands for
Bardo. They were dressed in formal robes, and the golden cloth
they wore in devotion to the ideals of Ringism creased and
crinkled as they bowed low to Danlo and hastened out of his
way. When Danlo entered the cathedral proper and stood inside
the nave, many more godlings were completing the preparations
for the night's
747
ceremony: setting up candelabra stands; lighting candles;
laying out many rows of little red rugs for people to kneel
upon. Because Danlo was grieving over what had just occurred
between him and Hanuman – and because he was curious – he
decided to watch the remembrance. He walked through the nave
and passed through a great archway where he found the stairwell
leading up through the central tower. The doors to the
stairwell however, were guarded by a surly-looking godling whom
Danlo did not know. But the godling knew him, and he allowed
him to pass without explanation. Danlo would have raced up the
stairs three at a time, as he had learned to do in Perilous
Hall, but every time he tensed his arm muscles, a wicked pain
shot through his injured elbow, and so he climbed the worn
steps carefully, as if he were a farsider from some made-world
who had never negotiated steps before. His footsteps echoed
through the empty stairwell, and he made his way up to the
mezzanine level. Much further above him, he had heard, at the
top of the tower was Bardo's sanctum, a room of great arched
windows which looked out on the four points of the City. He
wondered if Bardo was in his sanctum now, perhaps rehearsing a
sermon for the ceremony, perhaps swiving some bright-eyed
godling whom he was personally instructing in the delights of
submitting to the Way. He smiled and shrugged his shoulders
then, and entered a dark corridor that smelled of ashes and old
stone. Soon he found the central loggia overlooking the nave.
He stepped out onto a narrow balcony; it was as if he were
stepping out into space. The cathedral's glorious interior
opened up before him. On either side of him, and above, great
pillars flared outward into the granite ribs that made up the
cathedral's vault. Below was the main body of the nave, which
was now golden in the light of thousands of candles. He placed
his hands on the balcony's railing and leaned out to get a
better view. The fine stonework on the outside of the balcony's
parapet, he noticed, was carved with Kristian angels and other
godlike beings.
748
 He could clearly see every detail of the windows and walls
around him. He looked across the nave at the pinnacles and
pretty wall ornaments where Bardo had cunningly hid his sulki
grids. He looked straight down below him. There, godlings
scurried about the chancel, arranging vases of fireflowers
around the altar. One godling, a devout-seeming woman with a
gold ring in her ear, approached the altar table and filled the
familiar golden urn with what looked like plain sea water. From
the aisles behind the nave, other godlings appeared pushing
steel cans over the bumpy floorstones. Each cart was stacked
full with remembrancing heaumes. The godlings laid these out in
front of the altar, one silvery heaume precisely placed in the
centre of each red rug. When they were done, Danlo quickly
counted the heaumes. There were a thousand of them arrayed in
rows between the altar and the cathedral's great double doors.
Oh Hanu, Hanu, why have you done what you have done?
  Because he did not wish to be seen, Danlo moved back into
the loggia's shadows. He waited there while the cathedral began
to reverberate with a lovely, godly music. He stood listening
to the music that the sulki grids made, listening and
remembering. After a while, the doors were opened and people
submitted their steel invitation cards as they poured inside
and took their places by each of the rugs. There were a
thousand people, many of whom were godlings wearing golden
formals or other gold-coloured articles of clothing. Many were
newcomers attending their first remembrance. Bardo had even
invited a few masters and lords of the Order who had hitherto
been scornful of Ringism: the Sonderval, Elia li Chu, Mahavira
Netis, and most surprisingly, Lord Mariam Erendira Vasquez, the
fourth lord of the Tetrad. They knelt on their rugs like
everyone else and sat holding the gleaming heaumes in their
laps. Then, from a doorway behind the chancel, Bardo stepped
out into the light and took his place at the centre of the
altar. He was splendid in his golden robe, to
749
 which he had fastened a great, flowing cape of black velvet.
He was all magnanimity and grandness, and he cleared his throat
and delivered a great sermon that boomed like thunder through
the nave. After he had finished, he directed Surya Lal and
other highly placed Ringists in pouring water from the golden
urn into blue cups. There were many of these cups, which were
passed up and down the rows of godlings kneeling on their rugs.
Danlo watched the thousand people place their lips to the cups,
and he lamented that this ritual drinking of water was all that
remained of the kalla ceremony. He listened with regret as
Bardo sipped from his own gleaming cup and then announced:
'It's known that Mallory Ringess became a god and will return
among us. Soon, sooner than you might expect. If you would
follow his way toward the infinite things, you must renounce
your old ways of thinking and remembrance the Elder Eddas.'
 Upon these portentous words the sulki grids bent and twisted
the light waves streaming through the cathedral and on the
altar next to Bardo an imago of Mallory Ringess appeared. Many
had never seen a sulki-made imago and there were gasps of
amazement. Although the imago's eyes were too bright a blue and
it wore a formal pilot's robe (which Mallory Ringess had rarely
worn) it seemed very real. The imago looked out over the people
kneeling before him, and it smiled. It stepped down from the
altar. Among the people it walked, smiling, beaming
peacefulness and great power, and speaking in a wonderfully
rich voice of the joy of becoming a god. At last it paused and
held out its finely made hands, beckoning to the heaumes that
almost all of them were clutching. It invited the people to put
on the heaumes and remembrance the Elder Eddas. Danlo watched
as a thousand people lifted up their heaumes and a thousand
heads disappeared into these glittering metal shells. He looked
through the rails of the balcony to the altar below, and he
watched Hanuman emerge from the chancel's doors. That night
Hanuman wore no
750
toque or hat of any kind; the clearface covering his head was
lit up brilliantly and a ghastly purple light spilled down over
his face. He bowed to Bardo, to the imago of Mallory Ringess,
and he bowed to the thousand seekers whose eyelight had
disappeared into a world that Danlo had come to know too well.
There were rows of seekers kneeling dead-eyed and motionless.
The polished heaumes along one row reflected the empty faces in
the row behind, row upon row all through the nave. Hanuman
looked up toward the loggia and smiled as if he knew Danlo was
watching, and he bowed deeply without mockery or shame. Then he
turned his attention to directing the remembrance. He faced
himself into the computer that he wore, and his eyes turned
inward upon himself, and then he was gone, too.
751



CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

The Catava Fever

 We classify disease as error, which nothing but Truth of Mind
can heal.
 – from Science and Health by the Eddy, founder of Kristian
Science

 And so Danlo, true to his word, spoke out against the Way of
Ringess. During the darkest days of the year, when the first
sarsaras blow white and deadly out of the north and sweep the
citizens of Neverness off the streets, he went about the
colleges of the Academy, speaking to friends, explaining to
masters and his fellow journeymen why he had decided to
renounce Ringism. He spoke passionately, lucidly and sincerely.
But, as Old Father was fond of saying: Truth disappears the
moment it is told – like steamy breath into air.' Thus Danlo
discovered that for every academician he persuaded against
attending a remembrance, three more were excited to apprehend
the Elder Eddas in any way they could, and they were all too
eager to kneel beneath Hanuman's heaumes. To counteract this
mass religious fervour, Danlo began to speak cleverly, even
cunningly, in a way that was not natural for him to speak. He
gave tongue to the verbal razors of the logicians in order to
cut away at unreason wherever he found it; he used secret cetic
techniques to play upon others' doubts and alarms; into the
tender ears of his listeners he even injected Fravashi word
drugs, carefully designed memes and phrases that would
inoculate them against the temptations of an explosive new
religion. In a little time, people began to listen to him. To
all devoted Ringists, he became a
752

 nuisance, and then more than a nuisance. He was, after all,
Danlo wi Soli Ringess, he of the great remembrance, son of a
god. Everyone knew that Hanuman and Bardo were his friends;
why, they wondered, would a friend speak against the way of his
friends, unless that way were indeed tainted and twisted with
lies? Ironically, Danlo's growing influence upon the members of
the Order won the approval of Chanoth Chen Ciceron, whom Danlo
detested as the most insincere of men. When Lord Ciceron made
overtures of friendship – or rather alliance – Danlo politely
demurred, citing his mathematical and remembrancing studies as
reason for rejecting numerous dinner invitations. For a young
pilot who had not yet taken vows to rebuff his Lord Pilot was
unheard of. Danlo worried that Lord Ciceron might find a way to
deny him his full pilotship, but this was a vague and distant
worry, as nothing next to his despair over Hanuman.
  This despair was almost total. Not since the Devaki had died
(not even when he had learned that it was his father who had
brought the slow evil to his tribe) had he suffered such
abandonment of hope for another human being. Despair coloured
all his words and each of his acts, and its colour was as black
as the oil that the scryers rub into their empty eye sockets.
His face bore the stark lines of sleepless nights and forgotten
meals; his body fell gaunt like that of a wolf at the end of
midwinter spring. He had a presentiment of disaster, and all
his visions of the future revolved around the image of Hanuman
li Tosh, with his diamond skullcap and his lifeless eyes. He
tried to communicate something of his foreboding to Tamara. One
night, over a late meal of bloodfruit and cheese, he talked
about Hanuman's love of power and asked her not to record her
memories. With clear, calm words she promised to reconsider her
appointment with Hanuman. But then she laughed, as if to say,
I'll do whatever it pleases me to do, and her laughter was full
of dark music and pride. When he left her house the next
morning, a blizzard was beginning to
753
 blow, a great mother storm of furious winds and blinding
panicles of ice. He hoped this bitter weather might keep her
inside next to her fireplace where she would be comfortable and
safe from harm.
   It is an historical curiosity that the sarsara of 2953 raged
for sixty-six days, more or less continuously, far into
midwinter spring of the succeeding year. It was the longest
storm ever recorded in Neverness, and in many ways it was the
worst. Considering that it was very cold, there was a good deal
of snow, and the wind blew at a deadly speed of a hundred feet
per second, instantly icing the flesh of anyone foolish enough
to expose her face. The cold wind killed people: hibakusha
huddled over their street fires; harijan beggars without family
or shelter; autists, of course, and even a few farsiders who
lost their way along the paths and the snowdrifts of the
Gallivare Green and froze to death only fifty yards from the
Yarkonan embassy. It was a grim, dark time, made all the darker
by the blowing spindrift and the endless snow clouds that lay
over the streets blocking out the sun. And then, on the 74th of
deep winter, there came news that numbed the people of the City
and made them eye their neighbours with suspicion and loathing:
Chanoth Chen Ciceron and two other members of the Order fell
ill with a disease that seemed to mimic the depredations of the
Catava Fever. When a master virologist examined Lord Ciceron's
brain tissues for evidence of infection, it was discovered that
he had indeed contracted a rare form of the Catava virus. It
was a memory virus, a bio-weapon made on Catava long ago and
long thought to be extinct, and no one could guess how it had
found its way into the grey matter of Lord Ciceron's brain. But
it had, and shortly after falling down into a screaming,
foaming fever, Lord Ciceron began to forget things: the first
part of his memory to be lost was his mathematics, followed by
his grasp of the universal syntax and other huge blocks of
knowledge. He forgot his history, just as he forgot all about
the politics of the Order. Then he forgot
754
 his name, the name of his father and mother, the names of such
common items as razors, bars of soap, or mantelets. After three
days of spitting at the novices who attended him and changed
his bed linen, he completely forgot how to control his bladder
and bowels. When the virus attacked the stem of his brain, the
virologists said, he would forget how to breathe, and that
would be the end of Lord Ciceron. The other infected
professionals – Angela Nain and Yang li Yang – did not forget
so much so quickly. There was hope for their lives, even for
part of their memories, if not their professions. As there was
neither an immediate vaccine against the virus nor a cure, they
were kept isolated in the Academy's hospice in comfortable
little rooms next to Lord Ciceron's. Much to everyone's horror,
the virologists singled out semen and vaginal secretions as the
vectors of infection. This determination sent the staid
academicians into a panic. It was discovered that the crusty
Lord Ciceron had had many lovers: Angela Nain and Yang li Yang
were only two of the young women and men he had taken to his
bed. After a quick inquisition in which all members of the
Order were made to reveal their sexual liaisons, the
virologists constructed complicated trees diagramming who had
swived whom. At least half of all the Ordermen, of course, had
kept vows of celibacy, but of the remaining half, almost all
were connected by unbroken chains of sexual fluids to Lord
Ciceron.
  This virus goes through the membranes of a pessary like a
drillworm through bone' – this was the rumour that spread
through Borja and Resa more quickly than any plague. But it was
not so. The virologists determined that the preparations that
prudent people made before coupling were usually sufficient to
maim the virus, or at least to stop it from spreading. During
the worst part of the storm, when everyone at the Academy was
required to submit bits of tissue for examination at the
virologists' tower, only four other people were found to be
infected. This good news touched almost everyone with an
unreasonable joy.
755
(It is curious how deliverance from disaster will elevate human
beings to the highest of spirits, even though their day to day
lives remain as dull and arduous as ever.) Danlo, even though
he scorned the fear of disease for himself, was nevertheless
relieved that none of his friends or colleagues would fall to
the memory virus. He had been especially concerned for Tamara,
who, after all, had made a career of swiving the lords and
masters of the Order. He decided that she should be told the
news immediately, and so he braved the snowpacked streets and
made the short, frigid journey to her house. He was surprised
to find her not at home. Six times over the next three days, he
crossed the City into the Pilots' Quarter, but her house
remained as dark and empty as an abandoned cave.
 'Most likely she's taken shelter at a hotel,' Thomas Rane
said to Danlo when they met for their evening remembrancing
work. 'Or perhaps she's cloistered in some master's apartment
and hasn't wanted to get her feet cold. There's no reason to
worry.'
  But Danlo did worry, and as the storm continued to blow, his
worry deepened to dread. Then, on the 82nd, there was an
interlude in sarsara's ferocity; the wind died to a low howl,
the snow stopped, and the temperature rose almost to the
melting point of mercury. And still Tamara did not return home.
On a hundred other planets, of course, Danlo might have
signalled her instantly by fone or radio, but this was
Neverness and no such devices existed. (That is, they did not
exist legally.) Finding a lost or hidden person in a city of
such great size was nearly an impossible quest, but Danlo was
certain that something terrible had befallen her, and so he set
out into the snowy streets on his skis, searching every place
he could think to search. First he went to the Hollow Fields to
make sure she had not left the City. After the Port Master
assured him that no one like Tamara had taken passage on any
shuttle or other vessel leaving Neverness, he skied back along
the almost abandoned Way to the centre of the City.
756
Just south of the Street of Embassies, he turned off on a broad
sliddery which ran past the grounds of the Courtesans'
Conservatory. He stopped before the gates of the Conservatory
and implored the gatekeeper to tell her superiors that he
requested an audience. Few men, of course, had ever been
admitted into the Conservatory. Danlo might have been turned
away, but he vowed to wait outside in the cold until the gates
were opened. He stood there with his back to the wind as
patiently as a hunter crouching over a seal's hole. Seeing that
he might freeze to death on the Society's property, the
gatekeeper took pity upon him. At last, she let him in. She
ushered him into the gatehouse, where a harridan was summoned
to talk to him. The harridan – a once-beautiful courtesan
wearing embroidered red pyjamas – questioned him about his
precise connection to Tamara. When he revealed that theirs was
a great love match, possibly the greatest the universe had ever
known, she made a sour face as if she had been made to chew on
the fruit of a lemon. But then she assured Danlo that the
Society was as concerned with Tamara's disappearance as he was.
She agreed to help him. She would send messengers to the City's
pleasure domes to query courtesans who might know her
whereabouts. She would review the list of Tamara's most recent
assignations and make discreet inquiries of the Order's lords
and masters. 'I promise she'll be found if it's possible,' the
harridan said sternly. 'But when she's found, I can't think
she'll be allowed to continue a liaison with a pilot who hasn't
even taken vows.'
  The next place Danlo journeyed in search of Tamara was to
her mother's house. Although it was unlikely she would have
returned to her family home, he thought that if Tamara were
sick or dying, she might desire a reconciliation with her
mother. And so he went down into the remotest part of the city,
where the Ashtoreth District overlooks the open sea. On huge,
tree-lined blocks stood the houses and apartments of the many
Ashtoreth families, and Danlo
757
 knocked on five doors before he found a matron who directed
him to Tamara's mother's house. This was an ugly and soulless
mansion just off the Long Glissade. Victoria One Ashtoreth
received him in the mansion's outer hallway, which was all
heating grates and bare stone, and quite cold, scarcely above
zero temperature. In truth, it was more of an airlock than a
place for human beings to meet and converse about important
matters. But the Worthy Victoria did not invite him into the
inner hallway, nor into the house proper. She stood before him
in a voluminous fur gown, puffing out steamy breaths of air as
she ascertained his mission. Despite the shapelessness of her
furs, it was obvious that she was pregnant, as he remembered,
with her thirty-third child. She stood tall and aloof, with her
hands folded across her swollen belly. Hers was a suspicious,
calculating face, plumped out with maternity fat, but still
lively and beautiful, in many ways more beautiful than
Tamara's. She was not a friendly woman. She looked Danlo up and
down with the kind of disdain one usually reserves for autists
or itinerant maggids. As a pilot in a city where pilots are
elevated to an almost godly status, her dismissive manner might
have irked (or amused) him, but he was too desperate to indulge
such emotions, and so he merely stood before her scrutiny,
waiting for her to deny that she had seen Tamara. This she soon
did. In fact, she denied Tamara altogether, patting her belly
and saying, This boy will be named Gabriel 33 Ashtoreth, but
he'll only be my thirty-second child. My tenth child no longer
exists. She's been forgotten. In answer to your question, I
must say I don't know anyone named Tamara Ten Ashtoreth. I must
say this – do you understand? None of my kinsmen will know her
either. You may ask for her in any house on any street, but the
woman you seek would never return here. Never.'
  Although the Worthy Victoria must have perceived that Danlo
was hungry and cold, she offered him neither food nor hot
drink. As an Architect in good standing – and he
758

 being one of the Unadmitted – she was forbidden to extend
this simple courtesy. But she was not a cruel woman; when
Danlo opened the door letting in a frigid blast of wind, she
offered to send for a sled. As Danlo had no money, she even
offered to pay for it. For a matron of a sect renowned for
chariness with money, this was an unusual grace. Danlo thanked
her but shook his head and bowed, and then went out into the
storm. Because he had made a practice of unbelief, he went up
and down the street knocking on doors and asking if anyone
knew Tamara Ten Ashtoreth. But no one did. She truly had been
forgotten, it seemed, banished wilfully from people's
memories.
  On the 85th of deep winter, snow began falling again and it
grew colder. As it happened, in the year 2953, this was also
the first day of the Festival of the Broken Dolls. It was a
dangerous time for anyone to be out on the streets. Although
the Festival is held to memorialize and mourn all artificial
life wantonly erased over the centuries, there are always a few
aficionados of terror who use this holiday to make human beings
mourn their own lives. There are slel neckers who steal upon
the unwary at night, who jab needles into necks and fract DNA
with terrible little viruses; they do this to 'break' human
beings at random so that people might understand the pain of
all the dolls broken in all the cybernetic spaces of computers
throughout the Civilized Worlds. It was a dangerous time for
Danlo to go about the Old City slidderies searching for Tamara,
but he had no thought – then – of slel neckers. Late on 85th
night, after he had spent many cold and fruitless hours
exploring the hospices near the various cemeteries, he returned
to his dormitory rooms. There, in the inner hallway standing
next to the fireplace, a messenger was waiting for him. A young
novice from the Society of Courtesans informed him that Tamara
had been found. Tamara was alive and waiting to meet with him.
The novice had been sent to escort Danlo back to this meeting
at the Courtesans' Conservatory.
759
  Upon hearing this news, Danlo beat the air with his fists
and cried out in joy. He did not care that his shouts likely
would awaken his entire dormitory. Then he looked at the novice
all grim and earnest in her flawless furs. His face fell hard
as iron, and he asked the question that he did not want to ask:
'Is she well or ... ill?'
'She's ill,' the novice said. 'I'm sorry.'
 'Please tell me ... how ill?'
  'I don't know. If you'll come with me, everything will be
explained.'
 Pausing only to grab a fresh face mask from his room (the
mask he had worn all day was stiff and caked with ice) he
accompanied the novice across the Academy's deserted grounds to
the West Gate. Then they skated up the old gliddery that leads
from the Academy straight to the great circle outside the
Hofgarten. It was very late, too late and much too cold for
anyone to be about. But the street was not wholly empty of
people. They passed quite a few festival-goers returning from
parties. Despite the cheery voices and puffs of toalache smoke,
an air of menace overlay the street. It was impossible to make
out the features of the people's faces, covered as they were
with masks or hoods. And it was too dark. The flame globes had
all been extinguished so that their light would not interfere
with the glow of the ice lanterns. Hung from each building were
ice lanterns fashioned in the shapes of little houses or
temples or other types of dwelling places. They were delicate
constructions of sheet ice and light, the faint light of the
blue or green or scarlet flames burning inside. These flames
were meant to symbolize the life of all artificial organisms,
and the street should have been glorious with light. Only, it
was snowing and the wind was up, and too many of these lights
had been snuffed out. Danlo marvelled at the trouble the people
took to renew the lights, night after night, year after year.
He thought deep, troubled thoughts, then, and he despaired over
the inherent fragility of flame. He was very glad when they
turned off the street and passed
760
through the gates of the Courtesans' Conservatory. No matter
how ill Tamara might be, he thought, it would be good to smile
at her again, to press his lips against her forehead and
listen to her rising breath.
  'Please follow me,' the novice said as they entered the
grounds of the Conservatory. 'And please keep a silence –
we're not supposed to talk while the novices are doing their
midnight exercises.'
  She led him past dark buildings rimed with driven snow. He
had no difficulty keeping a silence. He listened to the
novice's chattering teeth and the whoosh of his own breath
inside his face mask. The wind had died, momentarily, and the
Conservatory was oppressive in its silence. He expected to be
taken to a hospice or cryologist's station, but the novice
surprised him by showing him to the door of the great house at
the centre of the Conservatory. This is the Mother's house,'
she said. 'You're the second man today she's asked inside.'
  Without knocking, the novice opened the door and escorted
him through various hallways into a gowning room. She took his
furs, face mask and his boots, and she stowed them neatly on
drying racks. She gave him a pair of knitted house boots to
wear over his cold feet. Then she helped him pull a black silk
gown over his head, and she told him, 'You may dress in this
house as you wish, but you must be gowned if you're to talk
with the Mother – she's asked to meet you before you go in to
see the Ashtoreth.'
 Danlo nodded his head, and he followed the novice into a fire
room rich with beautiful furniture and other finely made
things. Although the room was much too luxurious to suit him,
it was a luxury of good taste and perfect proportion; he
thought he had never been in such a lovely room since coming to
Neverness. He sat at a marble chess table which had been
cleared of chess pieces and set with a tea service. He rubbed
his head as he watched the novice pour a fragrant cha tea into
his blue cup. She bowed to
761
 him, smiled shyly, and she went to inform the Mother that he
was prepared for their meeting.
  He waited through three cups of tea. To him, this seemed
quite a long time, but it was actually not since he gulped his
tea like a thirsty wolf, burning his mouth and throat. At last
he heard sounds outside the room, and then the door opposite
the fireplace opened. Two harridans in red pyjamas stood
supporting an old woman between them. It was the Mother, he
thought, the famous harridan who was the head of the Society of
Courtesans. She wore a gown of black silk over her pyjamas. The
whole of the gown, front and back, was covered with crewelwork
and other embroidery; the scores of harridans who run the
Society had each stitched this exalted fabric with jewels and
lovely designs, as a pledge of their devotion to the Mother.
The harridans helped the Mother into a soft couch next to
Danlo. They made sure that her legs were properly cushioned and
elevated. They poured her tea. After plumping out her pillows
and arraying her gown so that it spread out like a giant fan,
they bowed to Danlo and left him alone with her.
  The Mother inclined her head toward Danlo, and she said, 'My
name is Helena Turkmanian, but you may call me "Mother", if
that pleases you.'
  Danlo smiled and he bowed to her. It pleased him indeed to
regard her as a most motherly woman, for she seemed aglow with
life and tenderness, despite her great age. In truth, she was
late into her final old age; she was old beyond old in a way
that the women of Danlo's tribe had never been. Her skin hung
freely from her bones and smelled sweet as a good leather. She
was frailer than any bird, yet she still possessed the strength
of a great energy, which seemed to well up inside her and
concentrate in her eyes. She had lovely eyes, clear and
infinitely kind, though hard as diamonds. Looking at her as she
looked at him, he thought that she would be completely generous
in her devotion to others – and completely selective of
762

those upon whom she bestowed this rare gift of love. At last,
he said to her, 'You are "Mother" to the courtesans, yes?'
'I am.'
'And Tamara called you this, too?'
  'Since she was a novice – she was always the most polite of
girls.'
  'Does she still call you "Mother" then?' Danlo asked this
question softly as he stared into his empty teacup.
  'She still does,' the Mother said, and she smiled sweetly.
'She's not as ill as you might have feared.'
  Danlo put down the cup and then touched the white feather
dangling from his hair. He was very aware of the Mother
studying him, listening to his uneven breathing, perhaps even
counting the pulses of the great artery that throbbed along his
throat. 'I have been ... very afraid for her,' he admitted.
  'I'm sorry,' the Mother said. 'And I'm sorry to tell you
that Tamara is not as well as you will have hoped.'
  Danlo pressed the scar above his eye as he looked at the
Mother and waited for her to say the terrible words, the words
he had dreaded hearing since Tamara had disappeared.
 And the Mother said, 'It seems that Tamara Ten Ashtoreth has
lost part of her memory. Two days ago, one of our voluptuaries
found her wandering about the Street of Musicians.'
'Two days ago! Why didn't you send for me sooner?'
 'I'm sorry, but our first concern was for Tamara. She'd
suffered dehydration and frostbite, and it's possible she'd
been raped before– '
 'Oh, no!' Danlo cried out as he leaped to his feet. 'Oh, no.'
  The Mother leaned forward upon her couch and covered his
fist with her soft, old hand. This was not an easy act for her
to manage, and the strain of it made her gasp. 'Please sit
down, Young Pilot. Would you like another cup
763
 of tea? It would be my pleasure to make your cup, but my days
of pouring tea are past.'
  Danlo sat down and filled his cup with steaming tea. He held
it to his lips, but he did not drink it. The Mother was
smiling at him, in a kindly way, as if to reassure him that
everything would be well. He looked down to see his hand
squeezing hers, then he closed his eyes because it hurt to
keep them open.
 'The tragedy,' she said, 'is that we may never know what
happened to Tamara. She's forgotten certain incidences in her
recent past.'
'Is it the Catava Fever, then?'
The Mother nodded her head. 'It would seem so.'
  'A manufactured virus,' he said. 'A weapon made on Catava
six hundred years ago.'
'Are you familiar with these weapons, Young Pilot?'
 Danlo opened his eyes, looking at nothing in particular,
remembering. 'Yes,' he said. 'Such a virus once killed people
... who were near to me.'
 'You mustn't be afraid for Tamara's life – she won't die from
what's happened to her, you know.'
'But if her brain is infected– '
  The Mother clapped her hands together softly, once, and then
looked at Danlo with a mixture of sternness and compassion. 'It
might give you hope to know she's not presently infected. The
virologist we summoned could find nothing in her body or brain.
The blood bears antibodies to the virus. Only antibodies. It's
possible the virus was destroyed immediately upon entering her.
Such miracles are possible. There are a few people – a few
billion people, most of them descendants of Architects who
survived the War of the Faces. Their bodies are almost immune
to bio-weapons. The Ashtoreths, for instance, there are so many
Ashtoreths. Tamara is an Ashtoreth, after all, and I've never
known her to be sick, not even a flu or a cold. The virus did
no detectable damage to her brain. This is certain. I've had
three akashics paint her brain, neuron by neuron
764
  – they've found nothing. She should be as well as you or I.'
'But she has forgotten ... things?'
  'She really hasn't forgotten very much,' the Mother said.
'It would seem that the virus fracted only select parts of her
memory.'
'But how is that possible?'
 'That's the mystery – no one really knows. Too little is
understood about memory. Not even the remembrancers can explain
how this filthy virus did what it did to Tamara.'
  Danlo was quiet for a moment as he looked down at the scars
on his hands. Then he asked, 'And what did it do?'
'That's hard to say.'
'Please tell me.'
'There are so many memories,' the Mother said.
'Please tell me what has happened to Tamara.'
  With a wave of her graceful hand, the Mother indicated
various items about the room: the golden alaya shells set out
above the fireplace; the Fravashi carpet; the ice sculptures
kept clear-cut and cold inside refrigerated clary vaults. She
sighed and said, 'If a wormrunner were to enter this house and
ransack it before stealing things, it would be difficult to
tell at first sight what was missing. But it would be obvious
that many things were gone. Only after the rooms were put
together again and an inventory made would it be possible to
determine which things these were.'
'Has Tamara's memory been ransacked, then?'
  'No, it has not. And that was the difficulty. It took us
most of a day to discover that there was a problem with her
memory. Talking with her was like entering a room from which
one or two items of great value had been stolen, with quiet and
great cunning. Little things that might appear as trifles or
curios to outsiders – but to Tamara they would be the most
priceless of memories.'
  Danlo sat completely still, as an Alaloi man sits beneath
the falling stars and awaits the coming of his ancestors.
Although he heard no voices nor saw any visions, he
765
sensed that the memories lost from Tamara's mind concerned him
deeply. Despite this overpowering presentiment – the absolute
coldness of knowing that locked open his eyes – he was
unprepared for what the Mother said to him next.
  'Young Pilot, I'm sorry to tell you, but Tamara has
forgotten who you are.'
 Danlo's eyes were wide open, but he could see nothing. Or
rather, he could see nothing more than the objects of the room
dissolving into a dazzling blackness that took his breath
away. The sound in his ears was like the ringing of a great
bell that drew out long and high until it hissed and burned
inside him. After a while, he became aware that the Mother was
looking at him, leaning nearer, reaching out her trembling
hand to touch his face. She touched his lips with infinite
gentleness, and he was aware of her old, quavering voice, this
golden instrument of compassion that pulled him back into her
presence.
  'She's forgotten meeting you,' the Mother said. 'She's
forgotten your time together, the words you spoke together
when you were alone.'
 He thought the Mother might break into weeping, then, because
her eyes were shiny with tears. But she kept her composure.
Some deep part of her seemed to be watching herself; it was as
if she were playing at life's tragedies with all the power of
her soul – despite the pain, always playing and ultimately
finding the game to be sweet and good.
  'She's forgotten even your name. Oh, not your last name –
she knows about the Ringess, of course. But she doesn't
remember he has a son.'
'Has she forgotten ... everything?'
'I'm afraid so.'
 'Unless she had died, I would not have thought that was
possible.'
'I know,' the Mother said.
'I cannot see ... how it must be for her,' he said.
'It's not well, you know. She's not at all well.'
766
 'It must be terrible ... to forget.'
  'Yes, it is.' The Mother said this with the certainty of an
old woman whose memory was not as keen as it once had been. And
then she smiled and said, 'But it's the most marvellous thing
to suddenly remember what only seemed to have been lost.'
  Danlo nodded his head as he thought about this. He asked,
'Has she been told about me? About... us?'
  'I talked with her myself this morning. Nirvelli was with
me. Naturally, since I hadn't been aware of your liaison, I
could only tell her what Nirvelli had told me about both of you
– and that wasn't very much.'
'No,' he said, 'we tried to keep things secret.'
 'Well, at least Nirvelli knew that Tamara was liaising with a
journeyman – actually she said that Tamara had fallen into
love.'
 'Yes,' he said. 'She had fallen. We did ... fall together.'
 The Mother smiled at Danlo as if she knew very well how such
a thing could be possible. It was obvious she favoured Danlo,
as a mother does a favourite child – and in other ways, too.
  'When I told Tamara about this love, she was astonished. Oh,
not because you're just a journeyman – she's accepted that she
might have broken our rules. Just as, seeing you, I've forgiven
her for breaking them. The astonishing thing is the depth of
this love. Nirvelli said that she saw it in Tamara, once. I see
it now. It's astonishing that Tamara could forget the "greatest
love match the universe has ever known". No, please don't be
angry, I'm not quoting your words sarcastically. I believe
there's something great in this love. Isn't love what we all
live for? A remarkable kind of love. This is what Tamara was
trained for. This waking up of the whole organism, the deepest
parts, out of love. The possibility of creating a new being.
This was her calling, her dream. The dream of many of us.
Astonishing that she might have come so close – and then
nothing. How must it be for her to know that she might have
lost the most
767
 priceless thing in the universe – and have no memory of what
that thing felt like or meant to her? I believe there's a black
hole of memory in the centre of her mind. It draws her inward.
Looking at this hole, she grieves. We all grieve, Young Pilot.
For her. And for ourselves, of course, for what might have
been.'
 Danlo bowed his head, trying to imagine what it would be like
to forget what had passed between him and Tamara. He could not.
After a while, he looked at the Mother and said, 'Surely you
have reminded her that she had ... a calling.'
 'You don't understand. Such things can't simply be reminded.
They can't be told.'
'No,' he said, 'I suppose not.'
 'Tamara has lost a good deal of our art, as well. Not just
the dream – but knowledge of the body, there are techniques
that she once knew, her flair for passion, all gone, now,
completely gone. She can't practise our art as she is now.'
'But she can relearn these things, yes?'
 The Mother's face fell mournful and her fingers played over
the fine wrinkles around her eyes. She seemed to reminisce
about the keenest of her memories, for her face was alive with
old hurts and pleasures. Then, in a soft, musing voice, she
said, 'Considered against all the things we learn in a
lifetime, what is this knowledge of ours but a grain of sand?
Against the tapestry of our whole selves, what is our sacred
art but the smallest of threads? So very little has actually
been taken from Tamara. And yet, everything.'
'It must wound her very deeply,' he said.
'It's killing her,' the Mother said. 'Killing her soul.'
Danlo shook his head. 'No, that is not possible.'
'Nevertheless– '
 'Did you know that the remembrancers have a saying?' he
asked. They say this: "Memory can never be destroyed".'
768
  The Mother suddenly flashed him a lovely smile. This is our
hope.'
 'Then it must be my hope, too,' he said. And then he thought:
Hope is the right hand of fear.
'You must be impatient to see her.'
'Yes,' he said. 'I am.'
  'Very well, you must go to her now, if you're ready. Talk to
her, Young Pilot. Help her remember.'
  That was all the Mother said to him. They drank their tea in
silence, and there was an understanding between them. Soon the
two harridans came to take the Mother away. Danlo bowed to her,
and she to him, and she took his ungloved hand in hers and
squeezed it so hard that the flesh along her arm jiggled and
shook. In her ancient eyes, there was contentment, even
happiness. He sensed he would never see her again, so he said,
'I wish you well.'
 Then he turned to study his teacup, the bits of greenish
leaves floating through the last unfinished dram of tea. He
wondered what it would be like not to remember, and he took a
swallow of tea, and he was not surprised that the taste of it
was astringent and very bitter.
769



CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

The Gift

Memory is the soul of reality.
 – saying of the remembrancers

 After what seemed a long while, the novice returned to lead
him down a dimly lit hallway to the guest room. In the Mother's
house, on the first floor, one room was always kept ready for
honoured visitors, or for harridans returning to Neverness from
missions across the Civilized Worlds – or for simple courtesans
such as Tamara who required the Mother's attentions. The novice
stopped before a plain wooden door and looked at Danlo. She
used her little white knuckles to knock at the door, and she
announced, 'My Lady, your visitor has arrived.'
 The door opened, and Danlo heard the novice say, 'My Lady,
may I present the pilot, Danlo wi Soli Ringess?'
  He heard her say this, but the words made no impression upon
his mind because suddenly Tamara stood before him in her red
robes and long golden hair. He drank in, all in a moment, the
darkness of her eyes, the quick embarrassment, the livid wounds
on her face and hands. Out of joy and good manners, he rushed
forward to embrace her in the Alaloi way, with his arms thrown
wide as a thallow's wings. But she held up her hand and backed
away. 'Please, no,' she said.
  She bowed to the novice and told her, Thank you, Maya, I'd
like to be alone with the pilot.'
  The novice returned her bow, cast Danlo a nervous glance,
and then retreated down the hallway. Danlo
770
followed Tamara into the room and shut the door behind him. The
sound of it closing was of metal clicking into metal. He looked
around the room, which was full of plants native to Old Earth:
araucaria and cactus and wandering jew, and other green plants
whose names he did not know. They gave off a light, oxygen
smell at odds with the heaviness of sweat clinging to Tamara's
robes. It was really too warm for her to dress so formally, but
clearly she was not comfortable receiving him in pyjamas or
unclothed, as was her wont. Looking at her, at the patches of
red skin regrown across her frostbitten face, he was
uncomfortable, too.
 'Tamara, Tamara,' he said. 'I looked for you ... everywhere.'
   'I'm sorry,' she said. 'If only I'd known. Please, would you
like some tea or ice wine? Would you sit with me, for a while?'
 The Mother's guest room was bright, cheery and furnished for
the convenience of old women. There was a raised bed covered
with knitted shagshay spreads; there was a multrum in a closet
with gleaming steel handrails; there was a robot that one could
summon or send scurrying about the wall shelves or vanities to
fetch various things. At the far end of the room, by the window
overlooking the Conservatory grounds, there was a little tea
table and two high-backed chairs. She motioned for them to sit,
facing each other, in these plush chairs. Of course, he would
have preferred sitting crosslegged on the carpet by the
fireplace; he could scarcely believe that she seemed to have
forgotten this.
   'I'm sorry,' she said as she gripped her hands together.
'I'm sorry, but this will be difficult. You have me at a
disadvantage. I've been told so many things about us – you'll
be thinking about these things while I try to remember.'
'You do not remember anything?'
She shook her head. 'No, nothing.'
771
  He stared at her in disbelief, and his breath quickened, and
he had the strange feeling of the hairs along the back of his
neck pulling up, tingling. There was a tightness in his chest,
a fiery knot in his throat that no amount of swallowing would
undo. He had hoped that seeing him would help her remember,
instantly, the way the shock of a sudden wind might recall
cold, happy nights spent around the oilstones, talking with
friends or playing with lovemates. He had hoped this too
desperately, and clearly, so had she. Hope was written across
her lovely, damaged face. Their eyes met, and she must have
expected to see something familiar and comforting in this
encounter, for suddenly she looked away, and her eyes were
black and bitter with disappointment. There is nothing there,
he thought. And this was an astonishing thing; this was a truth
that made him want to scream and pull his eyes out of his head.
They should have recognized each other, as they had at their
first meeting and all their times together since then. Even if
both their memories had been lost, it should have been as if
they had known each other for a billion years and would honour
this bond for ten billion years more. Only now there was
nothing. Looking at him, he thought, she could not see him.
Something inside her (perhaps in him, too) was blind.
 She has been blinded, he thought, and with this turn of his
mind, he began to rage against a universe that could engineer
such a tragedy.
'Pilot, are you all right?'
 He sat in his soft chair, knuckles pressed to his head. After
a while, when he had caught his breath and could see again, he
choked out, 'You ... were right. This will be hard.'
'I can only imagine how painful this must be for you.'
'And for you,' he said, 'isn't there a similar pain?'
 'No, I don't think so. Mine is only the emptiness of
forgetting. While you – what could be more painful than
remembrance?'
772
  He smiled and shook his head. 'Everything I remember about
us is blessed. Truly. Shall I tell you the things I remember?'
'You have a remarkable memory, it's said.'
 'Sometimes it is hard ... for me to forget.'
'Then tell me,' she said.
 He swallowed three times, then said, There was a game you
taught me, an art, a kind of telepathy like face reading – but
not really like it at all. The object was to open the cells to
signals from the cells of the other. After joining, for half a
night in the lotus position, always looking into each other's
eyes ... this becoming of the other person's cells. To become
the other. We did this, once. Do you remember? It was the
ninth of winter, and it was snowing all night, and when
morning came you kissed me and said– '
  'No, please.' Tamara held up her hand and shook her head.
  'We found the place,' he said, 'where the thoughts stream
before they become words, and our thoughts were the same, for
a moment, then for half the night. Like two rivers flowing
together. Wordless. But endless, too. When morning came, you
said a thing to me that only I– '
'Please don't say any more.'
  At the sound of panic in her voice, he suddenly paused. 'But
why not?'
  'I've decided it would be best if you didn't tell me
anything.'
  'But you must want to know,' he said. 'It must be terrible,
not knowing.'
  'Of course I want to know. But it's tiresome being told. I
want to remember, for myself, if I'm to remember at all.'
'But that was my intention. To help you remember.'
  'I don't think anyone can help me, after what's happened.'
'There are ways,' he said. The memories are always
773
 there. Onstreaming, like light. But with our minds, we close
doors to them. We stand with perfect vision in darkened rooms.
This is called forgetting.'
'Well, I suppose some doors are locked shut – forever.'
  'No, that is not true. There is always a way to open a door.
To find the key. The problem is finding the key.'
 'If only I could believe that,' she said. 'I wish I had your
faith.'
  He smiled and said, 'Faith – I have been accused of being
too much a disbeliever to have any place left for faith.'
'Have you?'
'Don't you remember?'
 'Well,' she said, 'you must be the most faithful of all
disbelievers.'
'You used to tell me that very thing.'
'Did I?'
  'Yes, you did,' he said. 'I think you are remembering, now.'
'No, I'm observing.'
'Just that?'
  'If I'm remembering at all, it's only what others have told
me about you.'
'Are you sure?'
  She cast him a icy look, then said, This is very tiresome,
you know.'
 'I am ... sorry. It is late and– '
'Please. I'm not at all tired. It's just that these
remembrancing tricks have all been tried and nothing has
worked.'
'Has a remembrancer attended you, then?'
  'Of course. Thomas Rane – I believe you know him quite well.
He was here this morning.'
'Looking for keys, yes?'
 'Isn't that what remembrancers do? He tried his word keys, of
course. And olfaction and gestalt, association memory, too. He
even had me face a simulation that some cartoonist had made –
a little vignette of you and me doing our work together. I'm
sure it was meant to shock me into
774
 remembrance. It did shock me, but not as Master Rane had
wished.'
 As Danlo nodded his head, he happened to look down at the tea
table. It was as black and polished as an obsidian mirror,
though besmeared in many places with fingerprints. He saw his
reflection there, dark, troubled and faint. Although it usually
amused him to look at his own face, the sight of himself
brooding over Tamara's disfigurement annoyed him, so he covered
his reflection with the palm of his naked hand. Instantly, the
top of the table began to change colours. It swirled with bands
of indigo, chlorine and puce. He realized that this was
probably a Simoom antique, a frivolous piece of technology
designed by cetics to read the simpler emotions. Its surface
was of pure chatoy, and it ran with colours as extravagantly as
did the eyes of a Scutari. In a moment, one colour settled out
and spread across the whole of the table. It was greige, the
ugliest of all the yellows. He could not know which colours
were coded to which emotions, but he knew what he was
experiencing at that moment, and that was a blend of
frustration and disgust.
  He lifted his hand up from the table and watched it return
into blackness. He said, 'In order to make his simulation, the
cartoonist must have captured our basic images and voices, yes?
Before permuting them.'
  Tamara, he saw, had been staring at the table as a hunter
studies the sky for signs of changing weather. He noticed that
she was careful to keep her hands away from it.
 'You're a beautiful man,' she said. 'And I'm a ... I'm a
courtesan. The outlaw cartoonists are always slelling images of
people like us to make their little simulations.'
'But Thomas Rane is no cartoonist.'
'Of course not. But who knows who he knows?'
  'It is possible,' he said, 'that Bardo has recorded the
images of various persons who have entered his house.'
'That shouldn't be a surprise,' she said.
775
  'No,' he said. And then, 'But you say that even this
simulation failed to excite ... your memory?'
'It failed utterly.'
 'Perhaps there is some key element missing from these
images.'
 'Thomas Rane suggested the same thing. He thought it would be
best if I saw you in person.'
 'I had hoped ... that you would recognize me,' he said. That
my voice would be familiar.'
'I wish I could say that it was.'
'Then ... I have failed, too.'
 His voice, he thought, his true voice that vibrated from his
throat as naturally as any animal's, should have been the
simplest of keys. It should have unlocked her memory, or at the
very least, the sound of it should have touched off inside her
the deeper emotions.
She is deaf to me, he thought. Something has deafened her.
 Tamara smoothed her hair away from her face and said, Thomas
Rane even tried giving me kalla, but that did nothing to help
me – it seems impossible to me now that I was ever enamoured of
that particular drug.'
'Yes, you once had a taste for kalla.'
'No more.'
  'But kalla brought you ... your first clear sight of the One
Memory.'
 'I know,' she said. She closed her eyes and pressed her
knuckles to them. She was on the threshold of tears, but like
an astrier mother attending her child's funeral she would not
allow herself to cry. 'I know that I once had this unitary
memory that everyone talks about. Saw it, quite clearly. I
could hold it, relive it again and again. But now it's slipped
away. I've only the slightest memory of the memory. It's very
faint, like the glow left in the sky after the sun has gone
down. I know it was important – the most important thing in the
world. But I can't see why. I can't see it, and that's what
bothers me. Because I really don't miss this memory, even
though I know I should. This
776
 is what frightens me, Pilot. If I've lost this marvellous
thing, I should mourn its passing, shouldn't I? What's the
matter with me that I don't care? That I don't care that I
don't care?'
 He watched her press her fist into the pit of her belly. Her
face had fallen waxy and white, as if she had eaten from a
cache of rotten seal meat. He engaged her eyes, then. He smiled
and said, 'I cannot believe ... that you do not care.'
'But I mustn't care, don't you see?'
  She let her hand fall to the table, and its surface warmed
to the colour of steel. Then Danlo touched the tabletop and it
vibrated up into a pearl-grey. He reached out his hand to touch
her fingers. She left her hand motionless to be touched. There
should have been a connection between them, electric and
instantaneous, the sure knowledge that the cells of his body
were meant to join with hers. But her palms were cold with
moisture; her fingers were stiff and unalive as if they had
been caught in the open wind and there was nothing between
them, nothing at all.
 Tamara, Tamara, he silently lamented. What wind could ever
blow so cold?
 Now the table was as grey as ashes; they both stared at it,
saying nothing.
 After a while, she withdrew her hand from his. She sat
quietly with her hands folded, resigned to her fate, looking
very much like an image that Danlo had seen on one of Bardo's
stained glass windows. It was an image of one of the Kristian
martyrs about to be burned to death out of pride for her faith.
 Not wind but fire, he suddenly thought. Not coldness, but
burning.
 Though her hands had suffered frostbite, they were as red as
if she had plunged them into a pot of boiling water. He asked
her if she remembered wandering the streets during the storm,
and she nodded her head.
'I remember thinking I should find a warming pavilion
777
 or go inside. The snow was blinding me, and it was so cold my
face was burning.'
Fire is the left hand of wind, he remembered.
  'Of course, when I finally realized I had frostbite, it was
too late. In another place, I might have lost my fingers and my
nose. But the City has the best cryologists in the universe, if
one can afford them.'
  He drummed his fingertips against the table as he stared at
her. He asked, 'Is your memory complete since you were brought
here?'
'I'm sure it is.'
  'But what do you remember in the period just before you were
found?'
  'I don't remember anything,' she said. There's a hole there
– missing time.'
'How much time?'
'I really can't say.'
  His fingers drummed faster, in waves from right to left.
'But on the other side of this hole – there is more memory,
yes?'
'Of course there is.'
'What memory?'
 She sighed and clutched the sleeve of her robe. 'I know what
you're doing. But it's hopeless – Thomas Rane has already tried
reconstructing the chronology. There are too many holes. Too
much time has passed. Even in the best of times, of course, I
could never have remembered my day to day activities over more
than half a year.'
  Danlo, who sometimes recalled every day of his life since he
was four years old, could only bow his head in respect for her
debility. In a low, solemn voice, he asked her, The holes in
your memory go back more than half a year?'
'At least that far.'
'There must be a ... first thing that you have forgotten.'
  'I believe the first hole has obliterated much of the night
of Bardo's party.'
'The night we met?'
778
'It would seem so.'
  'Strange,' he said. The table beneath him, he saw, was now
turquoise on the verge of deepening into blue.
  'It was the third or fourth time I'd been to Bardo's house,'
she said. 'I remember drinking a glass of wine and chatting
with a holist I'd once had a contract with. I remember the
triya seeds popping and the smoke, and I remember meeting
Hanuman and– '
'You remember meeting Hanuman?'
'Of course I do.'
'But he met you ... only minutes before I first saw you.'
 Tamara squinted and rubbed the back of her neck. She seemed
confused. 'I'm sorry, I don't remember seeing you.'
  'With our eyes, we found each other,' he said. 'And then
Hanuman presented us.'
  She shook her head slowly back and forth. 'I remember
looking at Bardo's bonsai trees and thinking how ill they
seemed and then, when I turned around, Hanuman was standing
next to me. He presented himself to me. Which was really a
courageous thing for a journeyman to do; most journeymen won't
even talk with a courtesan. But Hanuman was different. I've
never met anyone with a better sense of himself. He was quite
charming.'
Danlo waited a moment before saying, 'And then?'
  'After that, nothing. I suppose I met you and we ... I've
been told we went off together. I'm sorry, Pilot.'
'You remember nothing more of that night?'
  'Only fragments. It's as if I'd drunk too much wine. Well,
no, it's really not like that at all because my memories aren't
at all hazy. They're clear as glass, but they're all broken
apart into thousands of pieces. I remember Hanuman reading
faces, little things he said. He was quite brilliant.'
  'You remember him reading faces,' Danlo said this flatly,
without emotion, though it surprised him to see the table
changing colours to a rich aquamarine.
'Yes, I've said that I do.'
779
'Nothing more?'
'What do you mean?'
 'You do not remember we were standing together while he did
this?'
'Is that true?'
'We were holding hands,' he said.
'I'm sorry, no.'
'Do you remember Hanuman reading Surya, then?'
 'Only that Surya was thinking of the Ringess. She was almost
worshipping, really. And after Hanuman read her face, she
practically worshipped him.'
 'Strange that you should remember this much but no more.'
'I'm sorry.'
 'Then you have no memory of warning me about Hanuman?'
'Why should I do such a thing?'
 'Because Hanuman frightened you that night. And other times
since.'
  Tamara covered her face with her hands, and she pressed her
fingertips against her closed eyes. She sighed and then looked
at him. 'I can't imagine being frightened of Hanuman,' she
said.
 'You have ... no dread of him?'
 'No, I don't think so. Most of my memories of him are
favourable.'
  Suddenly, the drumming of Danlo's fingers stopped. 'Is it
possible,' he asked, 'that you have forgotten certain things
about him?'
 'That would be only natural,' she said. 'Since many of my
memories of him must have been connected to you.'
 How is memory connected to memory? he wondered. And then:
Hanu, Hanu, what is this fate connecting us like two hands
joined together?
  Without warning, a coldness and clarity came over him, and
he sat utterly still. He was distantly aware of the table's
surface falling away into a deep blue colour, and then into
780
a luminous blue-black that swallowed up his outspread hand. His
field of vision widened to include many things at once: the
snow-encrusted windows; the plants hanging from the ceiling in
brilliant cascades of green; Tamara's lovely face, full of
perplexity and pride; and the other thing that was not of fibre
or flesh or material substance, but was nonetheless just as
many-textured and real. This other thing was composed of plots
and aspirations and jealousies (and love), of strands of fate
woven together as tightly as a tapestry, and of real events
that had occurred in spacetime, in chambers and houses that
human beings had made, and out in the pure, frigid air that
circles the world. What he saw was not a dreamscape nor of the
universe of conjecture, but rather a perfect visualization of
reality, whatever reality really was. It came to him in an
instant, fully formed, like a jewel falling out of the night.
It was faceted with ten thousand surfaces and angles; he had a
sure knowledge of only a few of these parts: Tamara's loss of
fear for Hanuman; a memory virus made hundreds of years ago on
Catava; the cleansing ceremony of the Cybernetic Universal
Church. To see the whole structure of Tamara's disfigurement
from these parts astonished him. And more, it sickened him to
know that what he saw so completely must be true.
 The universe is like a hologram, he remembered. Every part
contains information about the whole.
  All his life he had sought a new way of seeing, and now,
here, in a secluded room closed in by a raging blizzard, his
eyes were beginning to open. In truth, he should have seen it
sooner, but his love for Hanuman had blinded him. But now there
was no love. Or rather, love had been joined – right hand to
left – to that terrible emotion that he feared more than any
other thing.
'Please, Pilot, have I said anything to anger you?'
  He sat staring at his clenched fist as it trembled atop the
table, which now ran with the darkest of red colours. His head
hurt, and his throat, and he was afraid the blood
781
 vessels behind his eyes might burst. There came a moment when
he saw that he might actually pass into unconsciousness or
stroke of death. It would be an easy thing to do. He was very
close, walking for the first time this particular razor's edge.
He was very close, as well, to cooling this deadly rage, but he
allowed himself, for a single moment, the luxury and
satisfaction of pure, righteous anger. And then he fell –
instantly, dizzyingly – far beyond mere physical emotion into
that other place which is all nightmare and torment. Terrible
images burned through his mind. There was a moment of sickening
freedom in which anything was possible and all things
permitted. He wanted to murder a man. He wanted to crush the
breath from the throat of his best friend. He wanted this more
than he wanted life, and there was a moment when he would have
died to accomplish it. Then he looked down at the table
reflecting a dark image of his face. The chatoy finish was now
purple-black, the colour of a bruise where the blood has
clotted deep in the tissues. He suddenly raised his arm and
punched downward, smashing this hard surface with his fist. He
gripped his damaged knuckles and watched the colours in the
table die.
No, I won't.
'Pilot, Pilot.'
 When he looked up, Tamara was standing next to him, resting
her hand on his shoulder. She touched his face, slowly,
carefully, as a zoologist might touch a sleeping cobra.
'No, I will not,' he whispered to himself. 'Never again.'
'Pilot, I'm sorry. I'm sorry.'
Never hurting another, not even in one's thoughts.
  He rubbed the knuckle of his ring finger. It was bleeding
and already swollen; probably it was broken. He promised
himself, then, that he would never again allow his hatred for
Hanuman to overcome him. If he could not purge this ugliness
from himself, he would bury it deep inside and build a wall
around it. As an oyster surrounds an irritant
782
 grain of sand with layers of pearl, he would build walls and
walls around his urge to kill, only each wall would be as pure
and adamantine as diamond. 'I've never seen anyone so angry,'
Tamara said.
  'I am ... sorry,' he said. The coolness of her hand against
his temple was a marvellous thing. He covered her hand with
his hand, then he smiled. 'But I have never had any anger for
you.'
'No?'
'No, never.'
  He wondered if he should tell her what he had seen. How
could she believe the accusations he would direct at Hanuman?
That Hanuman was both a murderer of minds and a slel necker?
How could he believe this himself?
 These are things that I cannot know, but nevertheless I know
them.
  Later, with logic, with knowledge, with all the resources of
the Order, he would analyse the events leading up to Tamara's
memory disfigurement. But now there was only the certainty of
this new way of seeing.
'Your face,' she said. There was so much hatred there.'
  'Yes, hatred,' he said. He peeled her hand away from his
cheek and looked at her.
 'I've never seen anything like it before. At least, I don't
remember.'
'Anyone can hate,' he said. 'A child can hate.'
  'From what the others told me about you, I'd never have
imagined that you could hate anything.'
  'I was ... thinking,' he said. Thinking about what happened
to you.'
  Even now, as he squeezed her hand tightly and clenched his
teeth against the popping of his knuckle, he was brooding over
Hanuman's manoeuvres to ruin her, seeing the whole of this
scheme from beginning to end. In the beginning, there was
pride, pain and immense ambition. In the beginning, in secret,
in a locked room deep within the cetics' tower, Hanuman had
approached his Lord cetic,
783
 the very private and unapproachable Audric Pall. The two men
had conspired to gain power over the Order. And over the Way of
Ringess. Hanuman had promised to aid Lord Pall's ascendancy
within the Tetrad, if only the Lord Pall would promise to use
his position to stop the Order's harassment of the Way, and
eventually, to support the growth of Bardo's church. And so,
promises had been made. Never saying a word, Lord Pall made
signs with his fingers and face, and he came to an
understanding with Hanuman. Only, Hanuman understood much more
than did Lord Pall. Hanuman could see that Lord Pall was
entranced with the temptation to manipulate and make a new
religion. Lord Pall would use his – and Hanuman's – immense
cetic skills to accomplish this. He, the powerful and wise Lord
of cetics, would impose his will upon Ring-ism, and he would
use its wild, religious energy to revitalize the Order. He told
himself that he would do all this unselfishly, legally, if
secretly. He would become Lord of the Order and the secret
master of a new, universal religion. And he would continue to
guide and control Hanuman li Tosh – or so he thought.
 Oh Hanu, Hanu, how clearly you understand that the whole
question of power always turns upon who has fear of whom.
   After this conclave – recorded neither by machine nor the
minds of men, save the two cetics – Hanuman had gone down into
the Farsider's Quarter where he knew many people: wormrunners,
warrior-poets, even a few slel neckers were among the more
dangerous of his acquaintances. He solicited the services of
an outlaw splicer, a smug little man with drooping moustaches
and ugly, jewelled eyes. For a huge sum of money, the splicer
procured for Hanuman a vial of viruses made six hundred years
previously on Catava. Like a bottle of Summerworld wine, it
had been passed from collector to collector, gaining value at
each passing. Hanuman was the first of its owners to make use
of the virus. With sweet ruthlessness, he seduced one of Lord
Ciceron's lovers, a young man named Yang li
784
 Yang. He infected him with this virus. And Yang li Yang had
passed this virus to Chanoth Chen Ciceron, and on to three
other academicians who immediately had commenced the
forgetting of themselves. Hanuman had done this in fulfilment
of his promise to aid Lord Pall; as well, he had done this to
unnerve and warn his Lord cetic, and for deeper reasons.
  Danlo suddenly stood up, and he asked, 'Tamara, do you
remember going to Hanuman ... to record your memories?'
 She looked at him sadly as she shook her head. 'No, of course
not.'
 'It would have been ... just before you began to forget
things.'
 'If I'd gone to Hanuman, I suppose he'd remember that I'd
visited him.'
'Yes, that is true.'
  'Well, he's your friend – presumably, when you discovered I
was missing, he would have told you that I'd recently been to
see him.'
'It is possible ... that you presume too much.'
'What do you mean?'
  Danlo came closer and laid his hands atop her shoulders. He
said, 'We are not the same friends ... that we used to be.'
 'I'm sorry, Pilot, but why should it matter if I went to
Hanuman just before this virus destroyed my memories? Are you
afraid that I've somehow infected him?'
'No,' he said, 'I am not afraid of that.'
'What, then?'
   'Do you remember resolving to record your memories? Your
experience of the One Memory?'
 She backed away from him unexpectedly and said, 'I suppose
it's possible I would have wanted to record whatever
understanding I had of the One Memory. Do you think that's too
vain of me? Well, I'm told that I used to be afflicted with
this sin of vanity.'
785
  Yes, he thought, she was vain and proud, and Hanuman knew
this as well as he did. Hanuman, ever a man of multiple
purposes, had kept this vanity in mind even as he designed his
remembrancing computers. He had schemed to lure her into the
chapter house where he kept his gleaming heaumes. He had issued
an invitation to her – and to the best minds in the City. How
could she resist such a compliment to her talents and
accomplishments? She could not, and so late one night she had
gone to Hanuman, out of will and pride, knowing that she was
doing a dangerous thing. When Danlo closed his eyes, he could
see this encounter with a perfect clarity: Tamara, stepping
through the doorway into the cavernous chapter house, standing
nervously in her snow-dappled furs as Hanuman politely bowed
and offered her a cup of hot tea. Her face was all curiosity
and resolution as she forced herself to trust Hanuman. And with
his sweet, silver words, Hanuman flattered her, and she
betrayed an instant delight at this good news of herself,
though she was instantly embarrassed at being so easily
manipulated. And then there occurred the crime that no one in
the universe knew of except Hanuman and Danlo. Danlo watched
this crime as it unfolded; he might have been a bird perched on
a window sill high inside the chapter house. This image burned
in his eyes: Hanuman, lowering a mirrored, metallic sphere over
Tamara's head as she fairly trembled with anticipation. Hanuman
told her that it was a remembrancing heaume, but it was not. It
was a cleansing heaume, stamped with the seal of the Cybernetic
Reformed Churches. With this unholy machine meant to free the
sinful of their negative programs, Hanuman laid bare her
memories and her mind. He painted a computer portrait of a
woman's selfness and soul, and when he was done, no part of her
remained a secret to him. It was an easy thing for him to
remove her memories, as easy as editing an erotic cartoon of
unwanted scenes. The heaume's invisible field propagated
through her brain, ripping electrons
786
away from their mother atoms, dissolving dendrites, erasing the
pattern of synapses that was uniquely her own. It was the
opposite of an imprinting, and it did not take very long.
Several times, she cried out, 'Danlo, Danlo!' – he could hear
this as closely as if her lips were pressed to his ear. She
called to him as she remembered many moments for a last time,
and then she was silent in unconsciousness, and only the air
molecules and wall stones carried the memory of the words she
had spoken. When Hanuman faced away from the ruins of her mind,
he was horrified with himself, yet pleased that he had finished
a nearly impossible task. It only remained for him to slip a
tiny needle into the back of her neck. He did this smoothly,
injecting killed viruses into her blood. Then he helped her
walk through the deserted chapter house into the main body of
Bardo's church. He left her there, in the cold nave, wounded
and groping for consciousness and completely alone.
 'Tamara, I think you began to forget things ... in the
cathedral.' Danlo said this with all the gentleness he could
find.
'Did Thomas Rane tell you this?'
  'Yes,' he said, bowing his head, lying. 'Master Rane said
that you remember being alone in the cathedral.'
 She took a deep breath before saying, 'Sometimes, after I'd
completed a contract, when I was too tired to skate home, I
liked going to the cathedral. Late at night when no one was
there. Bardo had arranged with the godlings to let me in
whenever I wanted. It was a good place to think, to be with
myself. I remember lying on one of the rugs, looking up at the
windows. Which was quite unusual, because I never allowed
myself to fall asleep there – I always sat when I meditated,
you know. I remember looking at the new window Bardo had put
in, the one where the Ringess has his head broken open and dies
his first death. That horrible window. And suddenly, I couldn't
remember how I'd come there. I had a sense of missing
787
 time – it's the most horrible thing, like dying a little, in
pans. Then, when I tried to remember other things, going back,
there was nothing. All these pans. All these moments that
should have been there. That I knew had been there. And I
couldn't remember. I think I panicked, after that. I couldn't
catch my breath and I was so dizzy I could hardly stand up. For
a while, I forgot who I was. No, I don't mean I couldn't
remember things, about myself – in a way, I had too many
memories. But I had no sense of myself. Of why I existed, why I
was even alive. I think that's when I started skating the
streets. I couldn't go home, don't you see? I didn't want to be
around anything familiar until I found out who I really am.'
 Danlo met her eyes, then, and he wanted to tell her that she
was Tamara Ten Ashtoreth, his betrothed, his joy, the woman
with whom he would someday create many children. He wanted to
tell her many things, but he just looked at her, and he
clenched his jaws, and he said nothing.
 'If ever I'd resolved to record my memories,' she said,
'after I'd been alone on the streets, there was no more
possibility of that. It's too bad that Hanuman didn't find me
before the virus did its work – something might have been
preserved.'
  Danlo found his lip between his teeth, and he had an urge to
bite at it until he tasted blood. But then he said, Tamara,
this virus– '
 'This virus,' she interrupted, 'was such a bizarre chance.
Who ever dreams of such things happening? It was just fate, I
suppose. Everyone has her own fate.'
 Yes, he thought, fate. Her fate intertwined with his, and his
fate joined with Hanuman's. He was certain then that the memory
virus had not touched her brain. It was a killed virus, as
harmless as any inoculation; Hanuman had murdered these little
bits of protein and DNA solely to create inside her particular
antibodies. Detectable antibodies. Hanuman knew that when she
began forgetting, virologists would examine her for the
existence of the
788
Catavan Fever. They would find the antibodies, and they would
presume she had been infected. No one would suspect that she
had been tricked beneath a cleansing heaume. People would pity
her as just another victim of the virus – along with Yang li
Yang and Chanoth Chen Ciceron.
  As Danlo looked at Tamara, at the way she searched his eyes
for pieces to the puzzle of her own fate, he knew that
Hanuman's destruction of Lord Ciceron was the least of his
objectives. In truth, it was little more than a diversion
concealing his deeper purposes.
Why, Hanu, why?
 Because, he thought, because Tamara dreaded and mistrusted
Hanuman – therefore he had cleansed her of her fears. Tamara
had the respect of the highest of courtesans, and so Hanuman
had disfigured her mind so that she would not speak to the
Mother against Hanuman or the Way of Ringess. Hanuman still
hoped to win over the Society – this was the first of his
hidden plans.
  Looking past Tamara at the snowflakes breaking against the
dark window, Danlo said, 'I cannot believe in fate. You are
still ... who you are. Nothing has changed.'
  Truly, he thought, she seemed much the same as the Tamara he
had loved. He knew that Hanuman had not wanted to destroy her –
only certain of her memories. This was the second part of his
plan, to remove from her mind any thought or image of Danlo.
Truly, Hanuman loved her too, and he had continued loving her
since the night of Bardo's joyance. He still hoped to make a
contract with her, and more, to preserve the best part of her
for himself.
 'The memory virus,' he said, 'cannot have touched your
deepest self.'
'I wish that were true.'
 'You have only forgotten ... a few things that have
happened.'
'Parts of my life, Pilot.'
'But these parts could be remade.'
789
  For a moment, her face brightened, and she said, 'It's kind
of you to say that. I must have loved this kindness in you.'
'It was more than that,' he said.
 'I'm sure you have many traits that anyone would love. You're
so– '
 Danlo rubbed his eyes and shook his head. 'It was not just a
matter of us loving certain traits in each other. It was more –
there was something between us, imaklana, this love magic that
is instantaneous. Eternal, too.'
  'Are you speaking of falling into love? It's always so
dangerous, to fall.'
'Dangerous, yes. But also halla.'
'Halla?'
'Have you forgotten ... this word?'
'It would seem so.'
  'Halla is ... the interconnectedness of things. The secret
fire that all things share.'
'No, I don't remember.'
  He closed his eyes for a moment, then said, 'Halla los ni
manse li devani ki-charara li pelafi nis uta purushu.'
'I don't remember this language at all.'
 He touched her hand, and he said, 'Halla is the man and woman
who light the blessed fire inside each other.'
  'Oh, no,' she said. She pulled her hand away from him and
dried her palm on the side of her robe. 'It's just this burning
we must avoid.'
  'But loving another ... there is nothing more blessed than
this, yes?'
 'But falling,' she said, 'isn't really love for another. It's
only love of love. Of the state of being in love.'
 'Love is ... love,' he said. He did not want to admit that he
understood the distinction she was making.
 'It's curious, but my mother used to warn me against falling.
Falling into "love drunkenness" as she called it. It's like
drinking yourself into blindness: when you fall, you can't see
anything. You don't even want to see what's
790
inside the other. All that matters is being near each other.
Together, being aflame.'
  With his forefinger, he touched the line of her jaw where
the skin had been badly frostbitten. He said, 'It might be
hard for you to hear this but... I am still drunk with this
fire.'
'Yes, I know.'
  'But not blindly drunk,' he said. 'It has never been like
that between us. We could always see ... each other.'
 'Do I see the same man now that I used to know before I fell
ill?'
'Yes,' he said. 'I am still myself.'
 'But do I see you differently?'
'I do not know – what do you see?'
 'Just a few moments ago, in your eyes, so much hatred. And
despair. I don't think I could ever bear to be close to this
kind of despair.'
  He closed his eyes, sorting through images of all the
tragedies he had seen during his life. Then he looked at her
and said, 'Everyone has the capacity for despair.'
 'Perhaps they do,' she said. 'I know I do. Which is why it's
difficult seeing you like this – in you, it's all so desperate.
So total.'
  Again, he moved to touch her, but she stepped backward and
shook her head.
'Please,' he said.
'I'm afraid, Pilot.'
'No, no,' he whispered.
'I'm afraid of you.'
 There was a stab of pain just above his eye, the place where
his headaches always came, suddenly, as lightning Wakes up a
sleeping city at night. He pushed the palm of his hand against
his head, and he understood the third and final of Hanuman's
purposes, the end toward which all his schemes had pointed. He,
himself – Danlo the Wild – was this end. Hanuman wished to give
him the most
791
 precious of gifts. He wanted to share with Danlo a pan his
soul, to make him see, to burn into Danlo's brain the wound
that will not heal. Out of love, out of hate, out of his
twisted compassion, he had annihilated the best parts of
Tamara's memory. He had done this terrible deed because he
wanted Danlo to suffer the universe the way it really was.
Hanu, Hanu, no.
   He heard himself murmuring, 'No, no, no,' and he wanted to
touch Tamara's fingers, her hair, her dark eyes which were
filling up with tears. But he could hardly move because he
suddenly lost his wind; it was as if a mallet or flying elbow
had caught him in the soft spot beneath his heart muscle,
knocking his breath away. He staggered, then threw out his hand
to steady himself. He stood with his head bent down, trying to
get his breathing right, and the weight of his hand fell hard
against the tea table. There was light then, a blinding white
light that flashed from the chatoy finish and filled the room.
Tamara gasped at its intensity, and she flung her hands over
her face and turned her head away. He squinted and shielded his
eyes; he might have been an infant left alone on the frozen
sea, a lost manchild looking beyond the ice's dazzling light
for any sign or hope of rescue. And then he was a child again,
and his vision fell off toward an infinite horizon. He was two
years old, almost, and he stood alone on the burial grounds
above the cave. He stood on the hard, squeaking snow totally
alone, and that was strange because Haidar, Choclo and Chandra
– the whole of the Devaki tribe – were gathered all around him.
In the centre of the circle that his people made, on a bier of
whalebone and white shagshay fur, lay the body of his favourite
brother, Arri. During the night Arri had died of a belly fever;
now he lay here beneath the harsh blue sky, naked and alone. A
short time ago Chandra had anointed him with a rank-smelling
seal oil so that the whole of his little brown body shined like
polished wood. Arctic poppies, red-orange like
792
 the sun, had been scattered across his head, chest, and legs.
Haidar and all the others were praying for Arri's spirit,
putting voices to words and concepts that Danlo could not
comprehend. After the prayers were finished, Haidar leaned
against Choclo, weeping, and he spoke of how he had loved his
oldest son. And all the time, Danlo stood close, listening,
learning a strange new word, anasa. Anasa: loving and suffering
– it was all the same thing, and somehow Danlo understood this.
We love most fervidly that which is separate from ourselves,
but being apart, we suffer. When his turn came to put
fireflowers in his brother's hair and to say goodbye, Danlo
fell across his cold body, clutching at him as if this were
just another wrestling match that Arri had let him win. He was
too young to understand that sometime, beyond years and
seasons, their spirits would walk together on the other side of
day. At last, Haidar had to prise his fingers away from Arri's
arms. The air was so cold that the tears would have frozen in
his eyes, if he could have kept them open. But his eyes were
tightly closed and burning, and now he stood over the chatoy
tea table with his head bowed down, unable to bear the blazing
white light. He straightened up, then, and removed his hand
from the table. The room was now dull and flat with washed-out
colours; outside the window, snow was still falling. He looked
at Tamara. Her eyes were wet and inflamed, and her chest was
trembling. In another place and time, it would have been easy
to console her, but now she crossed her arms over her breasts
and stood as stiff and cold as an ice sculpture. He could not
touch her, even though he burned to lace his fingers through
her hair and kiss her head. At that moment, it was all he ever
wanted to do. To love is to burn, he thought, anasa, and as
long as lovers could be together, this burning was the sweetest
pain in the universe. But if they were kept apart, it was pure
flaming agony. Tamara, at least, had been spared this pain.
(That is, she had been spared the consciousness of it.) But
Hanuman had given him the gift of
793
 fire, and now and always he would burn for something
impossible to ever hold.
'Tamara,' he said, 'this does not need to be.'
 Moving very carefully not to touch the table, she sat back
down in her chair and tried to smile at him. 'What has
happened has happened. You can't change the past.'
'No, but I can remember it.'
'It might be better if you could forget.'
'No, it is just the opposite,' he said.
 She must have seen a flash of hope in his eyes, for she
asked, 'What do you mean?'
  It is one of the ironies of existence that each human being,
once in his life, will come to think thoughts which were once
unthinkable. One day each of us will do the very thing he had
thought impossible to do. Danlo stood with his knuckles
pressed to his lips, and he burned with desperate dreams, so
he said, There might be a way to remake your memories – have
you considered this?'
'No, I won't consider false hopes,' she said.
  'Every word you ever spoke to me,' he said, 'the temperature
of your skin every time you touched me ... I cannot forget. It
should be possible to copy these memories into a computer. And
then to make an imprinting. There is a woman I know, an
imprimatur who helped me when I first came to Neverness. She
could help you.'
  Tamara stared at him in disbelief, shaking her head. 'You
want to cark your memories into my mind?'
 'It would be a way ... to remember.'
'Are your memories that good?'
 His memories, he thought, were flaming crimson. His memories
were ten billion fiery jewels spinning in the centre of his
mind. He looked at her and said, Thomas Rane has told me that
my memory is nearly perfect.'
'Perfect for you, perhaps.'
'Tamara, I will– '
  'If it were you who'd lost your memory,' she said, 'would
you let someone cark you this way?'
794
 'I... do not know.' In truth, he could not imagine parts and
pieces of his memory simply vanishing. 'What else can we do?'
 'But there's nothing to be done,' she said softly.
'Everything that you remember, the way that you remember things
– these are your memories, not mine.'
   He moved around the table, over to the window. The clary
panes were rimed with frost, and he dragged his fingernail over
them, etching and scraping, seemingly in random lines. It was
only when he stepped back a pace and focused his eyes that he
realized he had absent-mindedly cut out a picture of a silver
thallow. It occurred to him then that Hanuman might have
preserved the memories that he had cleansed from Tamara's
brain. This was much more than a false hope. Why should Hanuman
cast away something so valuable? Perhaps he had incorporated
Tamara's memories into his Elder Eddas. Certainly he would want
to know whatever secrets Tamara had discovered about him, Danlo
the Wild. Hanuman collected knowledge and secrets the way some
aficionados of art selfishly hoard rare paintings for their own
pleasure – he might wish to gaze at the scenes he had stolen
from Tamara's mind, again and again, in the privacy of whatever
computer space they had been hidden.
 He turned to her and said, 'But what if it were possible to
recover your memories? To put them back into your mind?'
'My memories? But it's all gone.'
 He did not want to tell her about Hanuman, not yet, so he
said, 'Suppose – this is just a thought game – suppose the
Architects are right and the universe is really a computer. A
computer that records every event in spacetime. What if the
events of your life could be recovered from this computer? If
God were really a computer who could restore– '
 'But how could that be possible?' she quickly asked. Because,
he thought, the memory of all things is in all things.
795
 Before he could answer her, she smiled to herself, then said,
'No, I can't play these kinds of games.'
'But all memory is– '
'Pilot, Pilot,' she said, 'please, no.'
  She got up from her chair and came over to him. She covered
his hand with hers. It was obviously a difficult thing for her
to do, because her hands were trembling, and her eyes were full
of hurt and uncertainty. But then she forced herself to a
sudden decision; she squeezed his fingers, gently, and she
said, 'Oh, Pilot, you don't understand. You've been so kind to
try to help me – I think I still love you for this kindness.
But I don't really want any more help with this remembering.
That's not why I asked you here tonight.'
'Then ... why?'
 'To say goodbye. I wanted to tell you that I can't make any
more liaisons with you.'
 He grasped her hand and looked down at her fingers as they
reddened with blood. He stared at the whorls and lines of her
fingertips, burning this unique pattern into his memory. He
looked at her fingers and hands; it was as if he hoped some
unexpected and favourable future might suddenly reveal itself
there. For a long time, he scryed like this, and he wanted to
ask her, Why? Why?
 'This will be hard to explain,' she said. 'But I can't live
for whatever has happened. I can't mourn myself, not while I'm
still alive. I won't. What I am now, tonight – shouldn't that
be enough? I'm always I. I always will be. My memories, myself.
This is the real marvel, don't you see? I mustn't ruin this by
hoping I'll wake up someday and remember things that I've
forgotten.'
 Danlo thought deeply for a while, then said, 'I have dreamed
... that we would live our lives for each other.'
'I'm sorry, Pilot.'
'But if we could meet each other every night then– '
'I'm sorry but it would be best if we didn't meet again.'
'Never ... again?'
796
'No, never.'
 So saying, she undid the collar of her robe and reached down
between her breasts. There was a scraping of chafed skin
against heavy silk. She slowly drew out her hand, which
clutched the palpulve pearl he had given her. Then, with a
single, sweeping motion, she pulled the necklace over her head.
  'I wanted you to see this,' she said. The tip of her finger
played over the pearl's teardrop surface, lingering.
  He looked at the pearl as she spun it between her fingers.
He always liked the way it caught the light and changed
colours, from silver to deep purple to iridescent black. 'It is
splendid,' he said.
 'It's very unusual, too – I don't have any other jewellery
like it.'
  'No,' he said, 'I wouldn't guess you would. These pearls
must be rare.'
'Did you give it to me?' she asked.
  Without waiting for him to reply, she pulled at his fingers,
opening up his hand. She dropped the pearl down against the
centre of his heart line. Strangely, it was heavier than he had
remembered.
  'I am only a journeyman pilot,' he said. 'How could I afford
such a gift?'
'I didn't know.'
'I have never seen it before,' he said.
 'Oh, I'm sorry, then.' She studied the string of the necklace
dangling from between his fingers. She touched this string,
made of a twine of shiny black hair. Then she looked at his
hair, hanging long and wild halfway down his back.
'Does it please you?' he asked.
  'It's lovely,' she said. 'I found myself wearing it when I
began forgetting, in the cathedral. I couldn't remember who
gave it to me.'
  He looked up at her dark, liquid eyes. There, in the centre
of each pupil, he saw a tiny reflection of the pearl. 'Perhaps
someday ... you will.'
797
'Perhaps,' she said.
  Suddenly, he closed his fingers around the pearl, making a
fist. He squeezed this hard little teardrop of nacre, feeling
the hurt of it against his skin; he squeezed it as long as he
could, until the muscles of his forearm began to tremble and
ache. Then he reached out with both hands and slipped the
necklace back over her head.
'If you like it, you should keep it.'
  She bowed her head, once, then looked at him. 'I should send
for the novice – she'll show you the way out.'
'I think I can remember the way.'
  'But that wouldn't be decent,' she said. 'In the Mother's
house, nobody goes to the door alone.'
'Why don't you accompany me, then?'
'Very well.'
  Because the outer hallway would be frigid, she went over to
the closet to find a houserobe to wear. While she was pulling
on this musky new fur, Danlo bowed his head, looking down at
the tea table for a last time. He spread his fingers out, then
slapped his hand down against the cold finish. The layers of
chatoy remained dead and black, devoid of all colour. And then
Tamara announced, 'I'm ready,' and he couldn't imagine never
seeing her again, and suddenly, strangely, the whole plane of
the table warmed to a faint, golden hue.
 Together they walked through the quiet hallways of the house.
Neither of them spoke; neither of them looked at the other. She
led him back to the gowning room, where he dressed for his
return to his dormitory. He put on his furs and boots, for the
moment leaving his face uncovered. Then she showed him through
the final hallway to the outside door.
'I should say goodbye now,' she told him.
 He looked at her for a long time. And then he said,
'Goodbye.'
With difficulty, she forced the door outward against the
798
 raging wind and struggled to hold it open. In mere moments,
the hallway filled with clouds of snow.
'Farewell, Pilot. I wish you well.'
 He paused, standing in the doorway, leaning his shoulder
against the heavy door. He wanted to tell her an important
thing. He wanted to unglove his hand and touch her blinking
eyes, and he wanted to tell her that they were fated to meet,
again and again. But he did not really believe this would be
true. He could not believe it, and he looked at Tamara's cold,
white face, and he remembered that flesh once frostbitten was
forever more susceptible to freezing. So he bowed, once,
deeply. He smiled at her and said, 'Farewell, Tamara.'
 He stepped out into the screaming storm, and instantly,
needles of ice were breaking against his face. Then, with a
harsh and hollow sound, the door slammed shut behind him. He
stared at this dark, massive door, and he said, 'Farewell,
farewell.'
799



CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

A Piece of Ivory

Self-creation is the highest art.
 – from Man's Journey by Nikolos Daru Ede

In deep winter, the light over the city of Neverness falls weak
and strange. On cloudless days – the brief, tenuous periods of
illumination when the sun is little more than a red glare
staining the horizon – the sky is half the colour of night, and
there are many stars. Some say that if it chances to storm
during this darkest season, then there is no true day.
Certainly there is no daybreak, for how can light break through
layers of cold nimbus clouds and swirling snow and a blackness
that is nearly total? When the sarsaras blow wildly through the
streets, there can never be a clear demarcation between
darkness and day, and so it is hopeless to stay awake all night
and await the coming of morning. Only the most tenacious or
foolish of people would attempt such a thing. In the bleak,
desperate hours after saying goodbye to Tamara, this is what
Danlo wi Soli Ringess did. He skated about the Old City until
he was exhausted and lost, and then he stumbled half-frozen
into a warming pavilion on a nameless gliddery. There, in this
miserable little shelter, with the wind shrieking all about
him, he waited for the air to lighten through the shades of
sable and slate and silver grey. He waited endlessly. He
thought he was near Bardo's cathedral; it was his resolve to
race through the cathedral doors the moment they were opened,
to find Hanuman, to reason with him, to plead with him or shame
him – anything short of physically
800
 harming him, as long as he would promise to restore Tamara's
memories.
  But all his waiting was in vain. When day finally came – a
cold, grey chaos of clouds and blowing snow – Hanuman refused
to see him. And on the days that followed, Hanuman remained
locked in the chapter house of the cathedral, and he refused to
see anyone: neither Danlo, nor Bardo, nor any of the godlings
who approached his door with trays of food and drink. Danlo
might have broken down this door, but two godlings always stood
outside it, guarding Hanuman's privacy. The godlings were new
converts to Ringism, and they were not friendly to Danlo. They
informed him that Hanuman had entered into the memory space of
one of his computers; he was experiencing a great remembrance,
they said, possibly the greatest remembrance that any human
being had ever known.
  'By God!' Bardo announced on the fourth day that Danlo had
come to visit Hanuman. 'If Hanuman won't open the goddamn door,
I'll break it down!'
 But Bardo did no such thing. He seemed reluctant to oppose
Hanuman openly, especially at Danlo's behest. Although he
obviously was still quite fond of Danlo, it embarrassed and
outraged him that Danlo had quit his church.
 'Perhaps you shouldn't come here any more, Little Fellow.
This cathedral is for Ringists, or for those wishing to become
so. You're a Ringess, it's true, but this is not the same
thing, eh?'
'No,' Danlo admitted, 'it is not the same.'
'Why are you so eager to see Hanuman – may I ask?'
'I have ... news to tell him.'
'About Tamara?'
  Danlo wiped a clot of snow from his hair and said, 'Yes, how
did you know?'
 'Nirvelli told me she'd been stricken,' Bardo said. 'I'm
sorry, Little Fellow. Oh, the poor woman – she was so bright.
It's too bad, so undeservedly bad. But tell me,
801
 please, why would you wish to give this bad news to Hanuman?
I've heard that you're no longer the closest of friends.'
  Danlo protested that they were still deep friends, while
Bardo listened with all the suspiciousness of someone buying a
firestone from a renegade programmer. Danlo considered telling
him the full truth, that Hanuman had stolen Tamara's memories,
but he no longer completely trusted Bardo. Bardo, at the
moment, was too caught up in the dreams of Bardo. Even if he
were willing to risk a schism within his church, he was
incapable of coercing Hanuman into restoring Tamara.
 'I would hope you're still friends,' Bardo said. 'Friendship
is golden. We shouldn't give up our friends so easily, eh? As
one friend speaking to another, I should advise you to leave
Hanuman alone – for now. Let there be a space of time between
you and those you are close to. A time for, ah, appreciation.
For reconsidering, perhaps. Do you understand? You're a
Ringess, and you belong with us – it would be too sad if we had
to close our doors to you.'
  Later that day, Danlo considered seeking the advice of a
master akashic. He considered revealing that Hanuman had used
an Architect's heaume to cleanse Tamara's memories, which he
had most likely preserved in one of his computers. He wanted
Hanuman to submit to an akashic's reading; he wanted the
akashics to use their computers to lay bare Hanuman's thoughts
and make him reveal where he had hidden these pearls stolen
from Tamara's mind. But in truth it seemed a lowly and
faithless act, to enter the akashics' fortress-like building,
to bow before some strange master and accuse Hanuman of crimes.
Even though Tamara now took refuge in an old woman's room that
smelled of araucaria and frostbite ointment, even though he
burned for redress, even though Hanuman had betrayed him, he
could not betray Hanuman this way.
  Of course, Danlo knew very well that both Hanuman and Tamara
had been born into Architect families; there-
802
 fore they both had the right to cleanse and be cleansed. This
issue had been settled a thousand years ago. Properly, it was
a religious matter. If the akashics construed this cleansing
strictly, they would declare that Hanuman had committed no
crime at all. They might even chastise Danlo for involving
himself with a courtesan and a strange, new religion. The
akashics, as everyone knew, were opposed to all religions.
  'But Hanu, you put viruses into her blessed body!' Danlo
told himself. 'And you put viruses into the Lord Pilot, too,
and this is a crime that is shaida inside shaida!'
  Slelling, the putting of strange DNA into the human body, is
in fact the worst of crimes. But the laws of the Order
stipulated that only a master pilot (or other master) could
force someone before the akashic courts with so little evidence
of crime, and Danlo had no real evidence at all. He had only
the sudden knowledge that had come to him during his meeting
with Tamara. And what, after all, had really happened that
night? Had he been possessed of an hallucination or some
terrible vision? Had it been only a waking dream or some
unbidden simulation of his mind? Or had he entered into some
marvellous new mode of perception that was perhaps akin to
scrying or remembrancing? He did not know. He knew only that
this perception was real and true; he knew that he was right
about Hanuman, but what if he were somehow wrong?
Oh Hanu, Hanu, what is the truth?
 In the end, Danlo did not go to the akashics. Not even the
Lord Akashic himself could make Hanuman restore Tamara's
memories. Only Danlo could do that. Somehow he must ease the
hurt between him and Hanuman and move Hanuman toward true
compassion, or else Tamara would never remember her life and
who she really was.
  And so Danlo returned to his dormitory room. He spent most
of a day and night, thinking and brooding. He ate no food; he
drank neither tea nor water. Atop his matted furs he lay nearly
motionless, and his eyes were open,
803
 unblinking. A visitor peering in his frosted windows would
have guessed that he was dead. Indeed, a part of him had died,
and another part did not want to live. But a third part
whispered that Tamara might be healed. Even as the darkness
inside him deepened, in the terrible time between death and
morning, this whisper grew louder. It grew into a roar more
urgent than the storm beating against the window panes. He
recalled, then, something that Jonathan Hur had said to him two
days earlier, a random piece of news tossed out as casually as
a snowball. Jonathan had told him of a celebration that Bardo
had decided to hold at Year's End. It would glorify the final
journey of Mallory Ringess, and it would be a great event – for
those who followed the Way. For those who did not (or for such
mavericks as the brothers Hur) Bardo's grand joyance would mock
the ceremonies marking the end of the Festival of the Broken
Dolls. 'Is it a coincidence that your father left Neverness on
the 99th?' Jonathan had asked him. 'Certainly it's no
coincidence that Bardo has called for a gift exchange – didn't
you know that our holiday must outshine all others?'
  So, on the holiest day of the Festival of the Broken Dolls,
a day in which Architects of the Infinite Life presented each
other with rich gifts wrapped in coloured papers, the
followers of the Way would appropriate this ancient ceremony.
They would do this to symbolize the gift that Mallory Ringess
had brought to humankind: this promise of becoming godly which
almost no one understood. The idea of giving gifts was like a
star exploding inside the depths of Danlo's mind. It
immediately roused him from despair. He recalled, then, the
walrus tusk which he had found on his journey to Avisalia. It
had been his intention to carve this tusk into a chess piece,
and then to give it to Hanuman as a gift. For thirty days this
plan had remained only half-formed and uncertain; at times he
had forgotten it altogether. But now he fairly leaped out of
bed and laughed with the thrill of anticipation. Now, inside
him, an image
804
 stood out as clearly as a yu tree against the sky. He beheld
this image from many angles all at once and seared it into his
memory. He decided to make this image real. Out of a simple
piece of ivory, he would carve a god. It would be more than
just a replacement piece for the missing god of Hanuman's
chess set. He would create a tangible figure that would embody
all the pain and passion of the gods. Hanuman had given him
the gift of fire; in return, at the great joyance, he would
give Hanuman a solution to the fundamental problem of life, a
way that all burning finally might be quenched. When Hanuman
held this gift in his hands, he would feel the true weight of
love, and his heart would break open. He would restore
Tamara's memory, and he would restore their friendship – this
was Danlo's last desperate hope.
 After making himself three cups of tea (he was very thirsty)
he set to work. He didn't care that it was the middle of the
night; his was one of Resa's few private rooms, so a little
banging about would disturb no one. It was a tiny room, just
big enough for his sleeping furs, drying rack, tea service and
his wooden chest. Beneath the window sat the plain, deep chest
that he had been given as a novice. He stepped over to it and
grasped the steel handle. The top swung open on well-oiled
hinges. Inside were all his possessions, which were few enough
considering that he was now a journeyman pilot. Beneath his
spare furs, robes, skate blades and kamelaikas, he kept the
only things that he valued: his mother's diamond ball; the two
books that Bardo had entrusted to him; the carving of the snowy
owl he had made on his journey to Neverness; the point of his
old bear spear; and sometimes, his shakuhachi. At the very
bottom of the chest, inside an old seal leather bag, were his
carving tools. Except for the white feather which he wore in
his hair, nothing was more precious to him than these tools,
for they connected him directly with his childhood, with his
people, and with the world of rocks and animals and trees in
which they had lived. He pulled out
805
the bag and opened the drawstring. His tools clicked and
rattled together as he rummaged about. Onto his sleeping furs,
as neatly as a jeweller setting out firestones, he arrayed his
scrapers and burins, his gouge, graver and adz. He lifted out
his saw and ran its glittering teeth lightly across his thumb.
Then he set out his chisels. He had five chisels, and they were
his glories. Two of the chisels Haidar had given him on his
eleventh birthday; his found-father had made them of rare
diamond stones set into hafts of whalebone. Danlo had made the
three other chisels himself, originally from lengths, of
shatterwood and flint blades. The blades were of varying widths
and could be easily sharpened or replaced as they wore out.
When he had entered Resa, he had replaced two blades, not
because they were chipped or worn, but because he had found a
finer material for carving than flint. On the day he started to
grow his beard he had taken his shaving razor (the same
diamond-edged razor he had used to shave Pedar's face) and had
carefully broken it into pieces. He had refit his chisels with
two of these pieces and used another to make a wickedly sharp
round knife. The simplest of his tools was a little mallet: a
smooth river stone that fit snugly into the palm of his hand.
He would accomplish much of his carving with this stone,
tapping it against the hafts of his chisels. And when he had
finished chiselling and scooping and graving, there would come
the polishing. For this tedious work, he had many bits of fine
sandstone and a rough oilskin. No piece of ivory, it was said,
could come alive until it was polished as smoothly as new white
ice.
 When he was ready to begin the actual carving, he said a
prayer to the spirit of the ivory, and removed the tusk from
the chest. It was as long as his arm, with a good, dense weight
and a rich smell that recalled the sea. It was old ivory, well
seasoned in salt water; its colour was of dark cream streaked
with amber and gold. He picked up his adz and began stripping
off the tough enamel husk. The flint blade made a high-pitched
rasping sound as it
806
 cut. With long, quick strokes, pulling the adz in toward his
body, he worked down the length of the tusk from tip to root so
as not to split the ivory. He sat crosslegged on his furs with
his tools close at hand. In little time, his lap and his furs
were covered with long ivory splinters. After the tusk was well
cleaned, he paused to wipe the sweat from his forehead. He
knocked away the splinters, careless of where they landed. Then
he used his saw to cut the tusk into five sections of equal
length. Although he would make only one chess piece, he had
never attempted such an intricate carving. It was possible that
he would ruin one or two pieces of good ivory before the god
took shape.
  In fact, he ruined four pieces before going to work on the
last one. The first two pieces split apart, almost as soon as
he put a chisel to them. Ivory is the loveliest of all
materials to carve; it has a quality of aliveness that only
improves with age, but as it ages it hardens, and the flaws
inherent in all living things often grow into deep cracks. The
trick of carving is to work around these flaws, not excising
them, but cutting so that the natural strength of the ivory can
support them. It might have been better if he had found a tusk
of new ivory, all soft and white and easy to work. New ivory,
after a year or so exposed to the air, will develop veins of
colour which grow and merge until the whole surface gleams like
seal milk spread over ice. It was just this pure coloration,
however, that Danlo did not want. His task was to make a chess
piece to match the rest of Hanuman's set. The other pieces –
the pilot, the alien, and the cetic – were ancient; they were
lined and cracked and seamed with subtle golden hues. His god
must resemble these pieces, not only with regard to weathering
and proportion, but according to style, as well. It would be
hard enough to duplicate the Yarkonan style: detailed but not
ornate, realistic but with a transcendence of emotion that
hinted at the ideal. The sculptor of the original set was quite
accomplished; she had endowed the black god and both goddesses
with various combinations of
807
serenity, compassion, joy and power. The black goddess was
particularly striking, for her face was cut with both wrath
and rapture and she seemed all-wise, like the statues of
Nikolos Daru Ede that stand outside most of the Cybernetic
churches. While Danlo could find no fault with this beautiful
work, he was seeking something more, a rendering of a face
inside him that might be impossible to bring to life.
Certainly, after ruining the third and fourth pieces of ivory,
he began to despair of ever creating his god. These pieces did
not split; he solved the splitting problem by roughing out
their shapes, not with mallet and chisel, but with the rasp
and whine of his skate file. When it came time to begin the
fine carving, however, he gouged the god's eyes too quickly
and too deeply, and so twice he had to abandon the work. He
picked up the last piece of ivory, then. He promised its
spirit that he would cut more slowly. He would visualize the
exact shape and size of each particle of ivory before removing
it – either that or he would not cut at all.
 Thus he began to carve his final god, and the carving seemed
to have no end. Moments flowed into moments and accumulated
until whole days had passed, and Danlo took no notice of time.
Occasionally, when his eyes burned with fatigue and his hands
began trembling, he lay back against his furs and dozed,
holding the ivory close as a child does a doll. Once every day,
perhaps, he left his room to eat a large meal. And then he
would return refreshed and strengthened for more carving. For
long periods, he would sit hunched over with his naked feet
clamped like a vise around the motionless god as he cut and
trimmed. Using one of his chisels, he chipped away at the ivory
bit by bit until his back knotted in pain and his feet were
blue with cold. During his worst moments, he thought of
abandoning the carving as hopeless. The sheer effrontery of
what he was attempting to create daunted him. Sometimes, it
amused him. But always, it astonished him, and so he kept
carving, on and on. He knew that if the image
808
inside him were true, if he could see it exactly, then he could
make it be. It was only a matter of freeing the god from his
ivory prison. Somewhere within the shrinking block of ivory
dwelt his god. Indeed, all gods and goddesses dwelt there, and
all species of humankind, every child, woman and man who would
ever live. He could see them all with a carver's eye, nestled
inside each other, the way the dour body of an Architect matron
contained the smiling, newlywed woman, and countless younger
versions of herself. All men, if you looked at them just right,
were much like each other. One might have curly hair, a
bellyful of sorrows and believe that Ede was the sole God of
the universe; another might possess the otherworldly beauty of
the Elidi birdmen, but between the two there was a commonality
and connection. And how simple it was to make one man into
another. How hauntingly easy the transformation of a thoughtful
child into one who was sad. With a press of his graver, he
could cut grief into a contented face. He would scrape away a
creamy white fleck, scarcely larger than a nail clipping, and a
billion trillion atoms of ivory would tumble to the floor, thus
changing the face of his god, subtly, irrevocably. If he could
carve with some finer tool, removing a single atom with each
stroke, might not all possible forms and things inevitably be
revealed?
 He thought about this as he marvelled over the mystery of
identity and consciousness. As the lights in his room burned on
and on through many nights, he wondered many strange things:
what if some great god such as the Solid State Entity, with
technologies known only to the gods, could carve him, atom by
atom? What if she could slowly alter the pigmentation of his
hair, the length of his bones, the contour of his teeth against
his tongue? Would he still be he? Why wouldn't he? Yes, but
suppose she could cark his mind with a new memory: what if the
sensa of his eating kurmash at his last meal were replaced with
the aftertaste of saffron rice and garlic – would this change
809
 anything significant about him? No, he was certain it would
not. But suppose she could replace all of his memories, one by
one, as minerals migrate through a fallen log to create
petrified wood. Suppose he remembered eating cultured kid and
wearing a clearface over his head. If, with divine subtlety,
the goddess could transfigure his flesh and mind through an
almost infinite succession of forms, perhaps into someone more
wilful and self-contained, then couldn't she cark Danlo the
Wild into an entirely different person? What, after all, was
the essential difference between himself and a man such as
Hanuman li Tosh? In his darkest nightmares, he had dreaded
becoming more like Hanuman; he had long suspected that
Hanuman's pale, anguished face was somehow a reflection of his
own. Now, as he hammered a thin blade of diamond against ivory,
he could see how this might be so. He could see the truly
marvellous thing about mind: that if he were to become Hanuman
or some other being, gradually, an atom of consciousness at a
time, then at no point would he ever feel very different or
that anything important about himself had perished. But one day
he would wake up and behold himself against the mirror of the
universe, and he would not be he. What, then, could have
happened to his true self, his deepest self that could not die?
Would it still live, somehow, inside whatever dread shape he
had become? Inside an alien, or a crab, or a worm twisting
through lightless tunnels beneath the snow? Inside all things?
What was the true, unchanging essence of anyone? And more to
the point, what was the soul and fate of this godly animal that
some called man?
 He had no final answer to these questions, or rather, no neat
aphorism that he cared to formulate as a philosophical truth.
He had often argued with Hanuman over such conundrums,
ultimately to no end. Now he must present his friend with a
different kind of argument, cut out of ivory instead of words,
which would appeal to the hands and eyes and heart. And so he
worked his hard, sharp tools
810
 against a cold chunk of ivory. He worked for seven days with
the sound of ice particles pinging against the windows,
knocking away invisible molecules of glass. By the eighth day,
his god was almost finished. It was a noble creature arising
out of a pedestal of flames; so skilfully had he carved the
base of the chess piece that it was difficult to tell whether
the tongues of flame wrapped around the god's legs or flowed
into them, becoming flesh, animating the god with the essence
of fire. The whole pose and expression of his carving was
directed toward one question: what survives when a man becomes
a god? The answer was cut into the knotted muscles of the god's
body, from the open hands to the tormented, twisted neck. It
was an answer that Hanuman would understand in each cell of his
body. Pain is the awareness of life, Danlo thought, and gods
were the most completely aware creatures that the universe had
ever known.
  All of history had pointed toward this awareness. In the
beginning, at the birth of the universe, all things were
concentrated into a single point, infinitely heavy, infinitely
hot. There was neither joy nor pain nor darkness nor light. And
then, in less than a trillionth of a trillionth of a second,
there was everything. The fundamental particles of matter – the
strings and infons and other noumena – fell out of the primeval
cosmic energy like snowflakes crystallizing from a cloud. Very
quickly, in an ageless, eternal second, as the universe
exploded outward at the speed of light, the plasma of matter
cooled and combined into larger units, into quarks, into
electrons, photons and neutrinos. But it would be a half
million years before the first stable atoms evolved, and
billions of years more before these atoms learned how to join
into the molecules of life. It was the most astonishing
phenomenon that randomly moving atoms of hydrogen could
eventually come together to make a creature who would love and
laugh and suffer. Who might laugh at his own suffering, or
suffer the love of life. All of history was the cooling of
matter and the
811
falling away from the fiery primal unity, but history was also
the rise of the consciousness of life. And now the number of
galaxies was uncountable, and in the Milky Way galaxy alone,
there were five hundred billion stars blazing in the stillness
of the night. And now there were human beings. How many, no one
really knew. Each man and woman was a cold island of
consciousness adrift in space. Each was afflicted with the
alienation from other life, with despair, with loneliness and
the keen knowledge that his sufferings could end only with
death. This was the doom of self-awareness, the disease of man.
Animals – a wolf or an owl absorbed into the sounds of
snow-covered forest – might enjoy a simple health and ease with
life, but never a man looking toward the future for hope of
joy. It was thought that gods had transcended all human
suffering. Gods, it was said, possessed minds as vast and
perfect as computers, and they could not fall mad over hunger
or jealousy or the shame of watching their bodies decay with
age. Danlo was sure that he had never seen a god, in the flesh,
but he could see their predicament in a way that others could
not. Gods could die – the Sonderval's discovery of the dead god
out near the star named Hanuman's Glory had proved this beyond
dispute, but even the eschatologists had not understood what
this might mean. With all the universe beckoning, gods must
fear death more than any human ever could. To a being who might
live a million years, death is the supreme tragedy, to be
avoided at any cost. Gods dread death as mere nothingness, the
annihilation of the infinite possibilities that lay before
them. This was the meaning of becoming a god: immortality,
power, the vastening of the self. No living being has a greater
sense of selfness than does a god, nor understands better what
it is like to be truly alone. Some might imagine that the gods,
in their quest for life without boundary or end, are the
closest to God of all creatures. But it is just the opposite. A
snowworm is closer, a grain of ice crunched beneath a harijan's
boot is closer. All of history is the flight
812
 from death, and none flee more quickly than the gods. They
flee outward toward the Virgo group of galaxies and the
Ayondela Cluster, and beyond, where the stars surge like an
ocean against the universe's cold, shimmering edge. But no god
has ever found a way out of suffering in this direction. And
none, though many try, has ever completely abandoned the body
or escaped the pull of matter. For gods, too, are made of
atoms, and each atom inside them once experienced the splendour
and ecstasy of the universe's birth, and they never forget.
Inside all gods is a burning for the infinite, for the moment
of creation where death and life are as one. This is the pain
of the gods. This is their eternal longing and torment. It is
the burning awareness of life that grows and grows, without
limit, on and on without end.
 Danlo was one of the first men to understand this, as a man.
With the cold edge of his chisel, he tried to grave awareness
into every part of his god, especially into its deeply flawed
face. But this was not enough. In many ways, Hanuman understood
the suffering aspect of god-hood better than he did. And so
Danlo worked other passions into the god's face, guiding his
round knife and shaver with all the care of a tightrope walker
placing his feet. Face is the doorway to the spirit – thus say
the Alaloi mothers to their children when they wish to
discourage the more selfish emotions. Danlo knew something
about spirit that Hanuman did not. Yes, there would always be
pain, and none could escape the flames of hatred, sorrow,
lamentation and despair. But everyone carried inside the memory
of the ancient heavenly fire so brilliant that it was beyond
all burning. The fire whose touch could cool the spirit and
quench the most raging thirst. Hot and cold, fire and ice,
beginning and end – it was Danlo's gift to see the identity of
opposites and to wed them together in his carving. The god's
finely cut lips were pulled back both in ecstasy and anguish.
It was the look of a man in the throes of sexual fever, or of a
father who stands with his face
813
toward the sky as he holds his son's cold, broken body in his
arms; it was the pleasure of a god who has created life around
a million planets, and the pain of watching a billion stars
burn out and die. Danlo carved and carved, and his god's eyes
twinkled with both laughter and madness, and with the utter
awareness of a love beyond love or hate. It took all of his
skill to reveal these passions. In truth, he had doubted that
his hands were capable of such work, and in all his exhaustion
and rage to carve, sometimes he wondered if the spirits of the
Old Ones might be guiding him. As a boy, sitting by the
oilstones on deep winter nights, he had watched the
grandfathers of his tribe cut animals out of ivory or wood. Now
he emulated the ease of their calloused old fingers, their
sureness and strength, and most of all, their patience. He took
infinite pains with the god's face. With his sharpest graver,
he did the delicate work around the eyes, and he cut these fine
lines between heartbeats, to keep his fingers free from the
slightest of tremors. He worked with infinite slowness to bring
out the god's most vital aspect, which he thought of as
terrible beauty. Hanuman must behold the god and be
soul-stricken with this beauty. He must take the chess piece in
his hands and say: this is a god who drinks continually from
the deep well of fire inside until he overflows with the power
to nourish other life. He is the one who demands life despite
all suffering and evil, and he shines with a terrible will
toward all that is fertile, wild and strong, and his face is my
own.
 When Danlo finally finished carving, he picked up his
polishing stone and began rubbing the body of the god. He was
uncertain, at first, how closely this chess piece approached
the image he had seen. But the more he polished, the more
satisfied he was with his work. Of course, he had not realized
this interior image perfectly, but then no creation can ever be
perfect. He hoped the god was 'just as it is', or lowalosa,
which is an Alaloi compliment for a carving which has revealed
the true spirit of
814
 any animal or being. He was very tired, but with his
sandstones he polished and polished for most of a day, pausing
only to blow away the fine ivory dust that accumulated in the
folds and fissures along the length of the god. He tested the
smoothness of this polishing with his eyes only. The Alaloi
consider it childish to put finger to a carving before it is
finished. But after he had rubbed it from pedestal to brow with
his finest oilskin, he pronounced his labour done. He looked
around the room for a place to put the god; the entire floor
was carpeted with ivory shavings and white dust. Moving like an
old man whose limbs are crippled with pains, he set the god on
the chest beneath the window. He touched it, then. He pressed
his hot, blistered fingers to the ivory, which was now icy cold
from the draughts of air falling all around. He marvelled at
the god's creamy smoothness, the lustrous beauty of old ivory.
He touched the eyes, the long nose, the coiled muscles of the
throat. He smiled just before collapsing against his furs. The
god returned his smile, or so he imagined, and the god laughed
at him and wept for him, even as he fell into a dreamless sleep
that went on and on without end.
815
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

The Broken God

You are what your deep, driving desire is. As your desire
is, so is your will. As your will is, so is your deed. As
your deed is, so is your destiny.
 – from the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad

 Danlo would never know how long he slept, for he had lost
measure of time. When he awoke, the lights still burned in his
room, and it was dark outside. The storm had mostly stopped;
down through the trees and glidderies, the wind whooshed
weakly, like a sick child's breath. Without looking at the
thermometer outside the window, he knew that it was warmer.
Some would hope that the sarsara was dying, but he recognized
this almost-quiet as only a period of recuperation, when the
wind rests for its sudden and murderous return. It was a time
for waiting, a time of chilblains and delusions and the nursing
of old wounds. He dreaded going out in such weather, but he had
to face the streets, and soon, because he had learned from one
of his dormitory mates that it was early evening on the 99th of
deep winter. Bardo would be conducting the great joyance even
now, as he stood in his quiet little room, gazing at the god
that he had made. A part of him insisted that he should heave
on his furs and rush across the City to the cathedral. But,
like a man preparing for his wedding, he dallied. Because his
beard and hair were powdered with ivory dust – and because he
stank of old sweat and seal oil – he used up long moments
cleaning himself and drying
816
his hair beneath the hot air jets in the bathing room. He
combed his thick, tangled hair – for him an unusual act of
grooming. After making sure that Ahira's feather was bound
tightly and properly displayed, dangling curved side out
between his ear and shoulder, he put on a clean kamelaika and
his furs. He sharpened his skate blades. He pulled on his cold
boots and spent much time walking back and forth, crunching
ivory chips against the hard wooden floor. Then he wrapped the
god in a newl skin, a beautiful piece of white leather that his
found-mother had once chewed and worked into a lovely, clinging
softness. He stowed this package in the inner pocket of his
furs. Each of his motions he savoured as if he were watching a
drama that some master cartoonist was programming, moment by
moment. At last, when he could think of nothing else to do, he
opened the door to the hallway, then went out into the storm.
  His journey to the cathedral was short, cold and memorable.
It was the last and holiest night of the Festival of the Broken
Dolls. Fourteen nights ago he had gone out to see Tamara, and
the streets had been splendid with tens of thousands of
delicately glowing ice lanterns. And now the lanterns were
still lit, only there were not so many of them because the
yearly ritual of their destruction had begun. Gangs of
red-masked Architects from the orthodox churches roamed the
streets, using hokkee mallets or sticks to smash any lantern
they could find. Danlo tried to avoid these gangs, but they
were everywhere, in groups of three or four or forty. The whole
of the Old City rang with cries and shouts and the tinkling
sound of broken ice. Lights died all around him, one by one,
making the skating treacherous. He kicked and stumbled and
grated over ice shards; every third building, it seemed, had
been vandalized, the pretty lanterns smashed into piles of
crystal. On one or two streets, the air was black and stank of
alcohol – not the kind of alcohol that one might drink as
skotch or beer, but the pure methanol that the outlaw
Architects
817
use to douse the robes of the dead. That night, Danlo was to
shun all violence, but in other districts of the City,
Architects of the Infinite Life would die defending their ice
lanterns and their enemies would burn their bodies with blue
alcohol flames. For any Architect, from any of the numerous
Architect sects, this is the most horrible of fates, for once
the brain has been boiled into a red jelly, it is impossible to
preserve the mind in an eternal computer. Architects dread
dying such an irredeemable death, but each year, on the morning
after Year's End, six or seven charred bodies are found in
alleys or out-of-the-way glissades. Although Danlo was lucky
not to intrude upon any such religious struggle, at various
intersections of the darkened glidderies, he smelled the sick
scent of burnt flesh. He could not tell from which direction
this stench emanated, for the wind was fickle and cruel,
blowing now from the east, then a moment later from the south
or north. Frigid gusts of air surprised him and cut him, like
drunken knives out of the dark. It was this inconstant wind, he
remembered, that had frozen Tamara's face and nearly killed
her. The wind followed him down twisting streets, growing
stronger at each skate stroke and turn. By the time he reached
the cathedral steps, he was cold to the quick, and one eye was
frozen shut. It occurred to him, then, that his plan to redeem
Tamara (and Hanuman) was truly hopeless. He might have traced
his way back to his dormitory, but the screeching wind kept him
from returning there. The wind was a wall of ice and memory and
sound that drove him up the steps three at a time, in through
the great western doors of the cathedral.
 Immediately, two godlings stopped him. They were handsome
young men too impressed with the gold robes they wore, and they
pushed the palms of their hands toward Danlo and asked to see
his invitation. When he admitted that he had none and then gave
them his name, it was as if a magic word had been spoken. The
shorter godling examined Danlo's wind-burnt face and said,
818
 'We're honoured, Pilot. The Bardo has hoped that you would
return. We're sorry you missed the joyance, but the Bardo is
still inside, and many of your friends. If you please, we'll
take your furs.'
  Danlo slipped the god from its pocket, then shrugged off his
furs. He stepped into the nave, which was ablaze with light
from thousands of candles. Although there were many people –
perhaps two hundred men and women milling about in their golden
formals – they seemed small and insignificant beneath the vast
sweeps of the stained glass windows. Bardo had finally
completed his scheme of replacing the old glass with new; even
the lovely stonework lining the walls had been resculpted, with
figures of Bardo and Leopold Soli and Dama Moira Ringess, with
Balusilustalu and other Agathanians whom some people believed
to be nearly as godly as Mallory Ringess. Danlo thought that
this robot-made sculpture was poorly executed, but then, he was
the only person in the cathedral whose attention was turned in
this direction. All the others stood in groups of five or ten,
deeper inside the nave, in the paper-strewn area around the
chancel. Indeed, there were papers everywhere, ten thousand
squares of gold foil carelessly cast against the bare
floorstones. They made a gleaming, crinkling carpet beneath his
boots. He realized, then, that he had missed not only the
joyance but the gift giving that followed. While he had been
combing his hair, Ringists from across the City had unwrapped
their presents and departed. Now only the elite members of the
Way remained. As he walked down the nave, he could see the
faces of those he knew very well: Thomas Rane, the brothers
Hur, Surya Surata Lal, Kolenya Mor, Nirvelli and Mariam
Erendira Vasquez. And Sherborn of Darkmoon, Lais Motega
Mohammad and Delores Lightstone and many others. Some he did
not recognize, such as the Trian merchant-prince and the alien
courtesan who stood next to Bardo. In truth, there were too few
people. He had hoped to present Hanuman with the god just after
the joyance,
819
in the great confusion of giving gifts that had filled the
cathedral. He had wanted to catch Hanuman by surprise, perhaps
behind one of the pillars of the dark aisle, to speak with him
privately and watch his face as he unwrapped the newl skin. But
now Hanuman stood at the centre of a circle of his admirers,
and it would be impossible to slip through unobserved and take
him aside.
 And so Danlo walked straight ahead, the sole figure in the
cathedral who was dressed in black. He stepped over mounds of
rustling foil. It was probably the crunching of this golden
paper that caused Mariam Erendira Vasquez to look his way.
Suddenly, ten others followed her gaze, and then two hundred
more, as everyone turned to watch him approach. They were
strangely quiet, as if they had been caught talking about him.
But that seemed unlikely because their eyes were soft and happy
with the remembrance of Hanuman's Elder Eddas. In their hands,
they clutched jewellery or boxes of triya seeds or purlets or
other coveted things. All of them, around their fingers, wore a
golden ring that Bardo had given them earlier. Bardo had given
rich gifts to every Ringist, and he seemed well pleased with
his munificence. He was drunk with the splendour of the moment.
(And stupefied with the afterglow of electronic samadhi.) In a
golden robe studded with black diamonds, he stood above all the
others as he laughed and waved his arm and called out, 'Danlo
wi Soli Ringess! You've returned to us!'
 Danlo walked into the crowd of people standing below the
altar. He might have been a stone falling into the sea, for as
he moved forward, men and women hurried out of his way, and
then in golden waves closed in behind him. He heard Bardo
bellow, 'What a night this is, by God!' The word 'God' rolled
over him and echoed from window to window high above; it filled
all the cathedral, and Danlo wondered if Bardo had chosen this
ancient structure in order to glory in the sound of his
magnificent voice. 'But it's too bad you missed the joyance,'
Bardo continued. 'It's
820
been a brilliant night – a night of true remembrance.'
  The last of the people stepped out of Danlo's way, and Bardo
was waiting with his arms held wide to welcome him. But Danlo
kept a distance; he bowed politely and looked past Bardo to the
altar stairs. There, standing on the plush red carpet of the
second step, was Hanuman. He was dressed out of colour in a new
golden robe, and he wore the diamond clearface like a second
skin moulded to his naked head. He bowed to Danlo. When he
straightened up, due to the added height of the steps, his head
was just higher than Bardo's. 'Hello, Danlo,' he said.
  Inside the clearface, the neurologics were lit up like
millions of glowing drillworms. They cast a nimbus of purple
light around Hanuman's head. His face was lit up, too, but not
with electronic samadhi nor any kind of cybernetic bliss. He
stared at Danlo with complete concentration, and his pale
purple eyes burned with a terrible awareness. Instantly, he
knew that Danlo had uncovered his rape of Tamara's memories. He
looked at Danlo, and he knew, and he knew that Danlo could see
this sudden knowledge running wild in his eyes.
 'Hello, Hanuman,' Danlo said. He bowed, never taking his eyes
away from Hanuman's. Inside the black centres of Hanuman's
eyes, he saw fear, as intense and dark as holes in space. There
were no secrets separating them any more, only the truth of
what Hanuman had done. And then Hanuman's gaze closed in upon
himself, and Danlo could see nothing there except hatred – but
hatred for whom he did not know.
Hanu, Hanu, he thought, I must not hate you.
 'I'm sorry for Tamara,' Hanuman said. His voice was warm,
sweet, and gentle; many people pressed closer to hear his
words. 'We all share your grief.'
  A nearby mechanic smiled at Danlo, but he would not meet his
eyes. It was that way with the others, too. Although they
offered quick and easy sympathies, they were suspicious of him
for suffering such a bizarre misfortune, and they
821
regarded him as if tainted with a secret disease. For a moment,
Danlo dwelt in memory of his last conversation with Tamara,
then he turned to Hanuman and said, 'You speak as if... she is
dead.'
  'No, it's just the opposite,' Hanuman told him. 'A part of
her – the deep, mysterious part – has been preserved. Tonight,
we've all witnessed this miracle.'
 Danlo took a quick breath of air, then asked, 'What...
miracle?'
 'Ah,' Bardo said. He stepped closer, and his great belly was
like a weapon forcing Danlo backward and upward, up upon the
first step of the altar. 'Ah, Little Fellow, but you should
have been told. Hanuman was able to record a few of Tamara's
memories before her affliction. She remembranced the Eddas with
a beautiful passion – tonight we've all tasted of this passion.
You were lucky to have known such a woman, too bad.'
  Danlo did not want to look at Bardo just then. He rubbed his
forehead, and he said to Hanuman, 'You say that she came to you
... and you recorded her memories?'
  'Yes,' Hanuman said. He smiled, and his face was like a
closed door. 'She had a beautiful soul – it was always her
pleasure to share the best parts of herself with others.'
 He is afraid, Danlo thought. He is afraid of something, but
he has no fear that I will accuse him of his crimes, here, now.
  'I know how you loved her,' Hanuman said softly. 'Losing her
must be like losing the whole world. Like losing your life.'
  'Yes,' Danlo said. He pressed his fingers against his eye,
the one that always ached with the beginning of a head pain.
 'If only you had attended the joyance,' Hanuman said. 'You've
been wounded, I know. I'm sorry, Danlo, but it might have
helped to hear Tamara's voice inside you, to see the Eddas with
her eyes. You should know, there's a part of Tamara's soul that
can never die, now.'
Hanuman smiled at the people edging the bottom of the
822
steps, and his voice flowed out like honey: 'What is the Way of
Ringess if not the way to heal humanity of its wound?'
The wound that will never heal.
 Danlo peered into Hanuman's eyes, looking for this wound, but
he saw only the reflection of his own anguished face. He
promised to restrain himself, then. He resolved that his anger
and hurt should flow out of him, despite all Hanuman's mockery
and twisted compassion.
  Danlo rubbed his aching throat and said, 'I think that parts
of Tamara are gone.'
'But, Danlo, what parts?'
  Danlo gripped the god in his fist and looked about him.
There were too many people standing too close. He was too aware
of their muffled voices, their curious eyes, their sweet, meaty
breaths. He moved closer to Hanuman so that he could talk more
privately, but Nirvelli and Bardo and five others followed him
up the steps. 'Parts ... of her character,' he forced out. His
words sounded bare and hollow to him, and he could hardly
speak. 'Her emotions, her ideals ... the way she sees herself.'
 'Aren't these the parts of the self that you once called
"face"?'
'Yes,' Danlo said.
  'And isn't this just the illusory sense of identity that
you've always disregarded?' Hanuman was speaking for the
benefit of his audience – and all the while aiming his words
like a dagger at Danlo's heart. 'Isn't this just the "I" that
dies when the body dies, while the deeper self lives?'
 'Yes,' Danlo said. 'I never saw face ... as it really is.'
'But now you do?'
 Danlo looked at Hanuman; despite the press of bodies nearby,
it seemed they were the only two people in the cathedral.
'Death is death, and there is nothing to fear,' Danlo said.
Truly. But as long as life is in life ... face is precious
beyond words or reckoning.'
Standing one step lower than Hanuman was Surya
823
Surata Lal, with her tiny red eyes and ugly mouth. She beamed a
smile of adoration at Hanuman, and she said, 'Someday, we'll
preserve ourselves from every possible disaster. This is what
gods must do: preserve.'
  'As memories are preserved ... in a computer?' Danlo asked.
  Hanuman nodded to Surya, then to Bardo. He said, 'Danlo has
always doubted that memories could be thus preserved.'
'I have doubted ... many things,' Danlo admitted.
 'He doubts,' Hanuman said to Nirvelli and to the others
standing below him. 'He of the great remembrance, Danlo wi Soli
Ringess – even he doubts. Yet he would like to believe. But
what is the truth of what is preserved?'
Yes, Hanu, what is the truth?
 'Everything is preserved,' Nirvelli said. With her dark
beauty and lovely voice, she was beloved of other Ringists, and
it seemed that she was speaking for everyone around her except
Danlo. That's the Way of Ringess, to preserve.'
 Bardo, posing with one foot against the steps while he
pointed toward the vault of the nave, caught the attention of
those around him as he said, 'Someday, the Ringess will return
to Neverness. If only he'd return tomorrow, he would restore
Tamara's memory. He's a god, by God! She would look at him, and
the Ringess would look into her goddamned brain, jiggle a few
neurons, and – instantly! – she'd remember herself.'
'That's the Way of Ringess,' Surya said.
  With a wave of his hand, Bardo beat the air as if to dispel
any doubts he himself might have about the dogma he was
delivering. 'It's the Way of Ringess to relieve human beings of
their suffering. It's the Way of Ringess to become a god
without flaw or bound. Who of us hasn't seen this in the Eddas,
tonight? Someday, when we've attained our godhood, there will
be no more suffering – we'll cure the whole damn universe of
its evils and pains.'
Danlo looked around him to see who accepted Bardo's
824
 words and who did not. Thomas Rane, of course, was cool and
aloof and imperturbable; he stood tall and grave in his grey
robe, and what he was thinking not even a cetic might know.
And the brothers Hur, with their impish faces and eyes aglow
with kalla – certainly neither they nor the thirty members of
their fellowship took Bardo's pronouncements very seriously.
They gathered as a group away from the altar, and many of them
were smiling or suppressing laughter. But Mariam Erendira
Vasquez and Rafael Mendeley and all the others seemed to be
waiting for Bardo or Hanuman (or even Danlo) to say more; they
drew in closer, like a school of paka fish around some bright
stone or bit of shell cast into the water.
'No,' Danlo said suddenly.
  'What?' This came from Bardo, who was standing below him on
the third step of the altar, sighing and pulling at his beard.
'What did the Young Pilot say?' Surya asked.
 Hanuman had now worked his way up the steps, and he stood
alone on the altar. All around him were thousands of
fireflowers in their blue vases. He pointed at Danlo and said,
'I suppose Danlo views godhood otherwise than we. After all, we
must remember who his father is.'
Do I remember who my father is?
  Danlo wondered this as he stood on the top step, looking
down at all the people spread out below. They cast uneasy
glances at each other and traded quick, nervous words. There
was an air of uncertainty about them, as if they regarded Danlo
as an incarnation of his father, or at least, as a messenger
that he had sent to them. From the centre of the altar, Hanuman
was staring at him with a fey intensity. Danlo sensed that the
future of Ringism might somehow revolve around this moment, so
he chose his next words with infinite care. Truly,' he said,
'the gods are sick with their suffering. It maddens them. You
cannot imagine their pain.'
Hanuman made a slight motion with his thumb, a bit of
825
 the cetics' hand language that spelled out a single question:
'Can you?'
  Surya Lal must have caught sight of this silent
communication. Her mouth turned down as she looked at Danlo and
said, 'I suppose the Young Pilot will tell us what it's like to
become a god?'
 With his finger, Danlo made a series of signs down by his
right side so that no one could see them except Hanuman. Then
he said, 'To a god, the worst agony of a man is no more than
the sting of a single snowflake breaking against the eyelid. It
is a drop of water in an infinite sea.'
  Hanuman nodded his head as if he had been waiting for his
moment. He stepped over to the altar table where the golden urn
gleamed as brightly as a mirror. He looked out over his fellow
Ringists, and he smiled the smile of a cetic about to share a
great secret with them. With quick, precise movements, he
pulled up the sleeve of his robe. Then he plunged his naked arm
down into the urn. When he drew it out, his hand was dripping
with water. He held his finger to his open mouth and let a
single drop roll off onto his tongue. From the people crowding
the altar steps, there were gasps and cries of alarm; many of
them, obviously, had forgotten that the urn contained only sea
water and not kalla. Now Hanuman held the urn in both hands as
he brought the rim of it to his lips. He tilted his head back
and drank deeply. Bardo, naturally, was outraged and envious at
this act. He must have viewed it as one more of Hanuman's
brilliant symbolic gestures (if not a sacrilege altogether).
But before he could stomp up the steps to offer a rebuke, the
urn was back on its table and Hanuman was pointing his finger
at Danlo as he called out in his silvery voice, 'Why have you
come here tonight? Do you wish to discourage us from our
destiny merely because it is painful?'
 'No,' Danlo said. He stood listening to the wind as it roared
through the cathedral spires. High above him one of the new
windows was poorly seated in its metal case-
826
ment, and it rattled and shook with each violent gust. 'No, I
only wanted ... to give you something.'
 So saying, Danlo gripped the god and stepped onto the altar.
All this time he had been holding his carving down by his left
side. If Surya or anyone else had taken notice of what was in
his hand, she must have thought it a bunched-up cloth or
chamois used for wiping down skate blades. Even Hanuman, who
missed few details about human beings' mannerisms or
accoutrements, seemed surprised. Danlo walked deeper onto the
altar, and his boots sank into the soft red carpet. With each
step he left imprints behind him and little chunks of slush.
All around him – on both sides of Hanuman – fireflowers burst
from their vases in lovely scarlets and tones of flaming pink.
Their scent was heavy, pungent, and sweet. At the centre of the
altar Danlo froze into motionlessness. His arm was outstretched
as he stood with the god in his open hand, wondering what
Hanuman would do.
'He's brought him a gift!' he heard someone say.
  Cautiously, slowly, Hanuman approached him. He looked at
Danlo's eyes and then at the lump of newl skin in his hand,
back and forth. Then, like a squirrel snatching up a baldo nut,
he took the god and retreated back a few paces nearer the altar
table.
'What is it?' Bardo said.
 'Look,' Hanuman said to Bardo, who was standing at the edge
of the altar, ahhhing and mmming as he pulled at his moustache.
'Danlo has brought me a gift.'
  For a moment, Hanuman's composure melted away, and he seemed
both abashed and secretly delighted at Danlo's gift. He looked
at Danlo sadly, all the while clutching the newl skin in his
hand.
'Open it now!' Bardo called out.
  'But it's too late,' Hanuman said. 'I exchanged all my gifts
earlier. I've nothing to give Danlo.'
 'Oh, but you have already given me the most precious thing,'
Danlo said. Although he spoke without irony, he
827
 was aware that his voice sounded deep, angry, and pained.
'You have given me your friendship. Your love. Your ...
compassion.'
The wound that will not be healed.
 They locked eyes, then, and a deep knowledge flowed between
them. It was as if their brains were connected along the firing
of their optic nerves. In that moment, Danlo thought it would
be impossible for Hanuman to conceal the truth from him. And he
could keep nothing from Hanuman, least of all his awareness of
the purpose of Hanuman's crime.
 Iknow why, Danlo thought. I know that you know that I know
that...
 Hanuman stood holding the gift in his hand; apparently he
could not decide if he should open it. Then, under the gaze of
two hundred other Ringists crowding the altar steps, he gently
peeled back the wrappings of newl skin. Soon the god was
revealed in its creamy ivory perfection and he stared at it for
a long time.
This is what you fear: that I know why.
'What is it?' someone asked.
'It looks like a chess piece,' Bardo said. 'Perhaps a god.'
'Hold it up so that we can see it!'
 Hanuman cast the newl skin away from him. Then he gripped the
god by its fiery pedestal and held it above his head.
  'It is a ... replacement,' Danlo said. 'For the missing god
of your chess set.'
 Bardo stepped onto the altar to take a better look at the
god. He was always interested in expensive, finely-made things.
'Ah, but where did you buy it? It's Yarkonan, isn't it? This is
marvellous work – it must be priceless.'
 Many of the people standing around the altar began remarking
upon the exquisite qualities of the chess piece, while many
more remained silent as they stared at the god's beautiful
face.
 'I ... made it,' Danlo said. 'I found a piece of ivory and
828
carved it. The Devaki fathers taught me how to carve.'
  Hanuman, too, was staring at the god. He could not take his
eyes from it. He turned it around and around in front of the
candles that flickered in their golden stands. Tongues of flame
illuminated the cool, subtle contours of the ivory as Hanuman
watched the firelight dance across the god's terrible face.
'Oh, Danlo,' he said.
 Danlo watched him examining the god. Did he understand that
it was meant as both a peace offering and a synthesis of two
ways of viewing the universe? He must know, Danlo thought. He
must see that there was a connection between the passion for
burning and the quest for remembrance. Ultimately, life's
terrible fire and clear waters of the Elder Eddas were made of
the same substance, and Hanuman must take the god in his hands
and accept this final paradox of existence.
 'I've never seen anything like this,' Hanuman said. His
knuckles were hard and white from gripping the god so tightly.
He should have smiled and bowed to Danlo, but the sight of the
god struck something deep inside him, and his face fell hateful
and furious as if Danlo had dropped a hot coal into his hand.
 'I had hoped that it would match ... your other chess
pieces.'
 'Can we take this as a hopeful sign that you've returned to
the Way?'
 Danlo swallowed against the dryness in his throat and said,
'No, I am sorry. It is just a gift.'
'Well, it's quite beautiful.'
'I had hoped ... that you would like it.'
'It's more than beautiful, really. It's inspired work.'
 Danlo saw the old madness come into Hanuman's eyes; instantly
his belly muscles tightened up as if expecting a blow.
'The god looks something like your father,' Hanuman said.
829
'My ... father.'
  'Mallory Ringess. The Ringess, whose inspiration we all must
follow.'
  From ten feet away, Danlo peered at the god from a new
angle. He looked at the long nose, the deep-set eyes, the
sensuous mouth open to both cruelty and compassion. Suddenly,
he saw what Hanuman saw: The chess piece resembled Mallory
Ringess as a young man, before he had been sculpted into the
form of an Alaloi. Without realizing what he was doing, almost
by chance, Danlo had carved this image of his father.
 'I... did not know,' Danlo said. He looked down at his
fingers, which were red and pocked with blisters. It was
strange, he thought, that during all the days he had worked on
the god, his hands might have recognized what his mind did not.
 'You've been inspired,' Hanuman said. 'But your inspiration
is false.'
'But, Hanu– '
  'As a man,' Hanuman interrupted, 'Mallory Ringess was the
most passionate of men. When he loved, he loved. When he wept,
his tears would have scalded the eyes of a lesser being. We all
know this. But the Ringess is far beyond such emotion. He's
left all suffering behind him. Can't you see this, Danlo?
You've given us the man, not the god.'
'No, no, Hanu, you do not– '
  'You don't understand,' Hanuman said. 'You never have.'
  They were now shouting at each other, trying to make
themselves heard above the wind which fell over the cathedral
like an ocean. The wind roared and shuddered and beat against
the windows; at any moment, it seemed, the panes of coloured
glass might slam against their casements and shatter inward.
But Danlo was only distantly aware of this potential disaster.
All his senses concentrated on Hanuman. Because Danlo's words
were lost into the
830
 larger sound of the storm, he stopped shouting. His voice fell
to a whisper. Hanuman would not be able to hear this whisper,
but he might read the shape of Danlo's lips and finally
understand what he was saying.
  'If gods truly have the powers that you say, then restore
Tamara.'
  'Am I a god, Danlo?' Hanuman whispered this question so that
no one could read his words except Danlo.
 'But she suffers – she tries to remember herself and she
cannot.'
'I know.'
'Help me,' Danlo said. 'Please.'
  Hanuman's cheeks suddenly flushed red as if Danlo had
slapped his face. Three tendays ago I asked for your help,' he
said. 'But you wouldn't help me.'
 'I ... could not.'
'And I can't help you.'
  'You could let an imprimatur copy Tamara's memories. From
your computer. There could be an imprinting, and Tamara might
remember.'
'No,' Hanuman whispered. That's impossible, now.'
'But, Hanu, why?'
  'Because her memories have all been destroyed. I never saved
them. You know why.'
 Hanuman pointed the god's head at him and shook it as if to
accuse Danlo of a worse crime than slelling memories. Danlo
knew then that all his hope had been false, just another way of
facing the universe with dreams rather than grasping the
reality of the present moment. Now, there was only the wind
streaming against the fragile windows and cold, falling air.
Now he hated a man. He looked at Hanuman, and Hanuman looked at
him, and something dark and primeval flowed between them, back
and forth, back and forth.
I must not hate him, Danlo thought. I must not hate.
  But he did hate; it was there, inside, indestructible,
surging up toward his brain with each contraction of his
heart.
831
 He'd thought that he had built a wall around this hate, but
now it was breaking out of him like a wound bursting open with
poisoned blood. He shook his head back and forth while his
fingernails clawed deep into his palms. Bardo, who was standing
nearby, looked at him strangely. He heard Bardo bellow out:
'What are you saying? By God, what's going on here?'
  There was a swirl of golden silk from his side, but Danlo
stared straight ahead. Even though he was aware of Bardo
bearing down on him, he could not break eyelock with Hanuman.
 'What have you done?' Hanuman whispered. He stood facing
Danlo, and he gripped the god with both hands. He held it in
front of him as if he were about to snap it in two.
  'No!' Danlo cried. His voice spilled out and vanished into
the hollows of the cathedral. For a moment, he felt himself
falling through an emptiness as vast and black as an
underground cavern. All he could hear was the murderous wind
pushing through cracks and shrieking over scooped stone.
Although many people crossed their arms over their chests
against this bitterly cold air, Danlo was burning like a child
with fever. His hands were hot and inflamed, and his belly, and
his head; his eyes stung from staring at the lustrous piece of
ivory that Hanuman held in his little hands.
No, no, no, no.
  It appeared that Hanuman was hardening himself to break the
god. His hands were tightened into fists. There were tears in
his eyes, and love, and madness, as if he could not bear
looking at Danlo – but neither could he look away. All his life
he had tried to create around himself a perfect sphere of
self-will, and he had almost succeeded. Only one connection
with the universe outside himself remained.
  'What are you doing?' Bardo shouted from a million miles
away.
Hanu, Hanu, no.
832
  There was an endless flow of hate and love between them, and
this love beyond love was the one thing that Hanuman could not
bear. For a moment, his eyes burned into Danlo's, and he saw
the universe as Danlo saw it, and he willed himself to break
the god. His will was very strong. If there had been a
cleansing heaume at hand, he might have used it to destroy his
own memories of Danlo. But there was only a simple chess piece
carved out of ivory, six inches of a walrus' tusk that Hanuman
held near his body as his fists clenched and trembled.
'He can't break it, can he?' someone shouted.
 Danlo watched Hanuman struggling against the tough, old
ivory. To Bardo and the other Ringists, it must have seemed
impossible that he could gain enough leverage to break it. But
Hanuman's hands were hard and strong from years of practising
his killing art, and there was a flaw at the god's centre.
Danlo, in his carving, had tried to hide this long, twisted
crack through the ivory, but he knew it was there.
'Look!'
  With a sudden jerk and snap, Hanuman broke the god in half.
It divided along a jagged crack through the god's belly.
Something broke inside Danlo, then. He watched tiny ivory
splinters flying out from the break at the god's centre, and he
stepped toward Hanuman in order to kill him. There was a
roaring in his ears louder than the wind. Something was calling
him to lay his hands about Hanuman's throat and squeeze until
he was dead. The memory of Tamara was inside him, whispering
terrible things. And then he heard the voice of his father, and
his father's father – all his ancestors, male and female, back
to the first bacteria which had fought their dark and desperate
battles in the oceans of Old Earth. There were billions of
voices inside him, screeching and crying and laughing, spread
through the tissues of his heart and brain. And all these
voices together were just the sound and the memory of life. The
love of death. Each cell of his body burned with a will
833
 toward destruction and death. He felt this terrible will flow
like molten stone into his hands; he was aware of it as a flash
of lightning behind his eyes. For a moment, he was almost
blind. His field of vision narrowed so that all he could see
was Hanuman, grinding his teeth together, bearing down with all
his strength against the ivory god as he looked at Danlo and
despaired. He saw Hanuman holding the pieces of the god in his
hands; Hanuman's face shone with astonishment, hatred, triumph
and shame. And then other voices began calling Danlo: the
scream of his young son; his daughter's quiet whimpering; the
laughter and weeping of a billion billion granddaughters
waiting forever to be born. This memory, too, lay inside him.
It was the memory of a future that only he could create. He saw
his hands circling Hanuman's throat to choke off the flow of
air and blood. He saw Hanuman writhing like a fish between his
hands, spitting and thrashing in his death agony. And Hanuman
dead with a broken neck, and Hanuman lying on the altar, his
head broken open upon the bloody golden urn that Danlo held in
his hands. Danlo began to take a step toward Hanuman, and a
thousand times Hanuman died with his eyes wide open, gazing at
him in love and fear. It was impossible to escape these deaths,
or any death, for it was all around him, frozen into an instant
of time. All things, even as they quivered and swelled with
life, were really quite dead. The tribes of the Alaloi were
dead – he could see their twisted bodies abandoned in their
snowhuts, or bleeding inside bright caverns, or spread out in
their thousands and thousands across the winter ice of the
world. Out toward the Vild, where the stars burned so
brilliantly they were sick with light, in each second of time,
a million human beings cried out and died. Soon all the stars
would burn out and die, and each man and woman across the
galaxy would be burnt and broken and dead. There was nothing to
save them, neither medicines nor meditation nor belief in the
redemptive technologies of the gods. This was the way the
universe was. This
834
 is the way it always would be. And now a little piece of the
universe named Hanuman li Tosh stood before him, looking at him
with fury and hate. Hanuman twisted his hands, suddenly,
forever, and a little piece of ivory broke in two. And so Danlo
would kill him now. In an animal rage, he would rip out
Hanuman's throat or break open his brains. Out of pure hatred
and will to destroy, he would hurry Hanuman on to his
inevitable death. It was right that he should do this. The wind
was calling him to kill Hanuman, and the stars, and each atom
of each living thing across the universe.
NO!
  Danlo took a step across the altar, and he became aware of
himself as a bringer of death. He wondered, then, how he could
hate so deeply and completely, yet see himself hating so
clearly.
 I am not I. I am the one who sees myself, who sees that he
sees.
  With this thought, his field of vision opened as if he were
a bird breaking through a layer of clouds below the sky. He saw
Hanuman trying with all his might to break the god; and
Hanuman, beholding the wildness in Danlo as he stared at him
with his love of fate; and Hanuman, hardening himself to kill
Danlo the moment that the god snapped and Danlo rushed upon
him. He saw many things at once: now Bardo sighed and moved
toward him, and the fat along Bardo's belly rippled like the
waves upon the ocean. Now, in the vase nearest Hanuman, a petal
from one of the flowers separated from the stem and fell in a
scarlet flutter through the air. Now there was light
everywhere, photons from the thousands of candles pinging
against stone pillars, reflecting into dark corners, falling
upward in golden streams toward the cathedral's windows. He was
suddenly very aware of these windows. There were eighty-two
windows spaced evenly around the nave, but one window in
particular called to him. It was the scene of Mallory Ringess
saying farewell to Bardo before his leaving
835
Neverness and ascent to the heavens. His hand was laid across
Bardo's forehead and tear-streaked cheeks, and his eyes, cut of
grey-blue glass, bathed Bardo in a silent blessing of light.
The body of the Ringess was made of bits of glass of every
colour, and each time the wind gusted, the glass fragments
strained against each other, and the whole window bowed inward.
No!
 At last the god that Hanuman was holding snapped. At the same
moment, a blast of wind blew in the great window, ripping the
casement entirely away from the stone wall. At first no one was
aware of this disaster except Danlo. High above the chancel, he
saw bits of violet and blue and gold burst into a shower of
glass. Many of these bits were still glued together and fell in
glittering shards and sheets. The heavy steel casement, still
supporting whole sections of the scene between Bardo and
Mallory Ringess, fell like a giant hammer directly toward the
altar. Danlo watched as the wind destroyed the window; this
took only a moment. But it would be a tenth of a second before
the sound of breaking glass and the sudden storm reached the
ears of the people below, and longer still before their nerves
fired and caused them to lift their faces upward.
'No!' Danlo cried out.
 He took a step toward Hanuman. He saw the window break, and
he waited an eternity to hear the sound of it. He saw himself
standing on the altar, lost into his hatred, raging like a bird
of prey. It was as if his centre – the seeing part of himself –
was no longer located behind his eyes or in his belly, but
rather inside the stone wall ornaments, or along the ribs of
the vault, or circling through the cold space of the nave
itself. Ten thousand bits of glass fell through the air,
describing lovely parabolas of sapphire and rose. The window
casement dropped in a perfect parabola toward the altar; Danlo
did not need mathematics to see that this rectangle of heavy
metal would exactly bisect
836
the space occupied by Hanuman's head. In twenty-seven tenths
of a second, it would crush Hanuman's brain into jelly and he
would die.
Hanu, Hanu, you must die.
 For part of a second Danlo waited, and then the sound of
death exploded through the cathedral, and two hundred pairs of
eyes snapped toward the falling window above them. Only
Hanuman, of all the Ringists, did not look up. He held the
broken god in his hands, and he never stopped staring at Danlo.
Danlo, Danlo.
 It was a truth of the universe that Hanuman must die. Danlo
knew that his own will toward hatred was a truth, just as it
was true (or would someday become true) that the galaxies out
beyond the Canes Venatici and many others would die. All these
truths he saw for the first time, and he knew he was very close
to the affirmation that he had been seeking for so long. But
then, unexpectedly, there came the flash of another truth that
he did not want to acknowledge. It was written in Hanuman's
face, in his death-haunted eyes, in the way that Hanuman would
never stop looking at him.
I have created him, Danlo thought.
 With every word that he had ever spoken to Hanuman, with each
act, ideal and expression of faith he had created in Hanuman
the desire to be more. With love, with wild-ness – even with
the sound of his shakuhachi which Hanuman could never bear
listening to – he had driven Hanuman to the dark interior door
that opens out onto the universe. Danlo, himself, had flung
open this door as if he were a child careless of the wildest
and worst storms. And Hanuman, for fear of freezing to death,
had been forced to slam it shut. Danlo looked at Hanuman
waiting behind this closed door, waiting for Danlo to step
closer and open it one more time, and he wondered how could he
murder this broken-souled man that he had created with so much
love and pain.
837
'No, I won't,' he whispered. 'No.'
 Upon this single word the universe turned. The hatred
suddenly left Danlo, or for the moment transfigured itself into
a deeper emotion. He took a step toward Hanuman, and then ten
more blindingly quick steps. He practically flew at Hanuman in
his urge to preserve his life. There were only tenths of a
second before the window casement crushed them both, but this
was time enough to change the future forever. He collided with
Hanuman in a shock of fists and knees and exploding breath. He
bore him backward, even as he tried to grapple with him. Then,
just behind Danlo, the window crashed into the altar, throwing
out bullets of glass, tearing a gaping wound in the red carpet
and pulverizing the stone beneath. The whole cathedral shook as
if a bomb had exploded. Everywhere glass was falling in
showers, even as he fell against Hanuman to push him out of the
way. With difficulty, through the shriek of broken steel and
Danlo's wild rush, Hanuman kept his feet. He jumped backwards
and struck out, with his knees, with his eyes, with the pieces
of the broken god that he still grasped in his fists.
'By God, you'll kill him!'
  Danlo was falling toward Hanuman, and he saw a gleam of
jagged ivory sweeping up toward his face. He might have caught
Hanuman's fist in his hand or at least twisted his head away,
but he was still trying to take hold of Hanuman, and his
balance was gone. As he fell over Hanuman, he waited for his
head to explode into light. But the blow never came.
'Be still, now, easy there!'
  Bardo had stepped behind Hanuman, and he had his huge arms
wrapped around him. Hanuman's arms were pinioned against his
sides. Although Hanuman stamped his boots against Bardo's feet
and drove his diamond-covered head back against Bardo's chin,
he could not make him let go. He twisted and writhed and beat
the pieces of the god against Bardo's robe, tearing open great
rents. Danlo
838
fell against him, pressing him back into Bardo's belly. For a
moment, the three of them stood welded together, struggling.
Danlo grasped Hanuman's wrists and pulled his hands up against
his chest. Hanuman could barely move. His face was up against
Danlo's; his breath fell over Danlo's face in hot, urgent
bursts. Danlo waited a long time for the madness to leave
Hanuman's eyes. Then he let go of Hanuman and stood back,
waiting to see what Hanuman would do.
 'What's wrong with you?' Bardo's voice thundered out. He let
go of Hanuman and stood looking about him at the ruins of the
altar. Broken vases and crushed flowers were strewn all about,
and there was glass everywhere. At the centre of the altar lay
the golden urn, dented and leaking sea water onto the carpet.
Many people had been cut by bits of flying glass; they stood
about, moaning or screaming or looking back and forth between
Danlo and Hanuman, and they seemed utterly confused.
  'Oh, my poor window,' Bardo said. This is too bad.' Then he
remembered his compassion and called out, 'Is anyone injured?
By God, is everyone all right?'
  As it happened, miraculously, no one was badly injured. But,
due to the missing window, everyone was instantly shivering.
The storm roared in through the opening in the cathedral's
walls. The north wind was bitter and deadly cold, and it
dropped clouds of snow over the Ringists crowding the altar.
  'Ah, but it's cold in here,' Bardo said. 'Perhaps we should
adjourn for the evening and go to the tower and take some
refreshment.'
  But no one, at that moment, was in the mood for food or
drink. With the breaking of the god, the great joyance had come
to an end. A few Ringists began edging toward the doors, while
others were speaking in low, nervous tones.
  'Danlo wi Soli Ringess!' This came from Hanuman, who had
regained his quickness of mind. He approached Danlo
839
 holding his hands open so that he – and everyone else – could
see the two halves of the chess piece. 'I can't accept your
gift: you're not a Ringist any longer, and this thing that
you've made is no expression of the Way of Ringess.'
 So saying, he cast the pieces down to the altar. They bounced
and clicked against pieces of glass; they rolled over and over
before coming to a stop. Bardo, who was horrified to see such a
treasure so badly treated, huffed across the altar. With much
sighing, he bent over and scooped up the pieces of the god.
 He turned to Hanuman and said, 'But Danlo saved your life!'
  Danlo waited motionless, letting plumes of snow fall over
him. Although he never stopped looking at Hanuman, he was aware
of Surya Lal and others talking among themselves, trying to
explain what they had witnessed:'... has taken a vow of ahimsa
... yes, but what a coincidence that Hanuman broke the god
exactly when the window fell ... I don't believe in meaningless
coincidences.'
 In fact, Ringists across the Civilized Worlds would see the
hand of a god in the breaking of the great window, as if
Mallory Ringess were somehow displeased with the composition of
his image and had somehow willed its destruction. People would
talk about the miraculous coincidence of the broken god for
many years to come. But now Hanuman was addressing Danlo, and
Bardo, and they turned their attention toward events of more
immediate concern.
 'Danlo has saved my life,' Hanuman said. He looked at Danlo
as though he hated what Danlo had done. 'I'll never forget this
– I can't forget he's been my friend.'
  'He saved your lifer Bardo repeated. Then he pressed the
pieces of the broken god into Hanuman's hand. 'He might have
died in your place!'
 Hanuman turned to Bardo and pointed at the pieces of the
window scattered across the altar. He said, 'If this window had
been mounted properly, Danlo wouldn't have
840
needed to demonstrate such self-sacrifice. Such faithfulness to
his vow of ahimsa. But, no, you wanted the window ready for the
joyance, even though many of us thought that the portrayal of
the Ringess was poorly done.'
  Bardo's face fell purple-black then, but he said nothing. He
stared down at the altar, muttering, 'Ah, too bad. Too bad.'
  With a few words, in front of two hundred stunned people,
Hanuman had shamed Bardo. And he had made a connection, however
false, between Danlo's carving and Bardo's monumental
effrontery in mounting a window that glorified Bardo as much as
it did Mallory Ringess. This was Hanuman's genius, to make such
connections, to construct in the minds of those who admired him
a reality that he wished them to believe.
 I have created him, Danlo thought. This is the future that I
have made.
 He shut his eyes, brooding over the cruellest of truths: that
time is like a river flowing in only one direction, and that
the future, once it arrives, can never be unmade.
  Hanuman nodded at Danlo and said, 'In my hurry to escape the
window, I tried to knock it away and nearly struck you. I'm
sorry.'
  Most of the Ringists, Danlo realized, had been too panicked
by the exploding window to notice what had occurred between
Danlo and Hanuman. But a few of them must have understood. Even
now, Hanuman was beginning to edit the memory of what they had
seen.
  'Danlo, I'm sorry,' Hanuman repeated. He held up the pieces
of the god so that everyone could see them. Then he brought
them together, fitting them like pieces of a child's puzzle.
Although Danlo was standing close to him, it was difficult to
see the crack that divided the god in two.
Hanu, Hanu.
 Hanuman's face was full of emotion as he called out: The
distance between the love of two friends is as small as the
space between the two halves of this chess piece.'
841
  Suddenly, as if he were executing one of the motions of his
killing art, he jerked his hands apart. High above his head,
the two halves of the gleaming god were now separated by three
feet of air. 'But the distance between one who follows the Way
of Ringess and one who does not is as wide as the light-years
between the stars.'
 I have let him live, Danlo thought. I cannot be sorry for
that.
  'Danlo,' Hanuman said. He moved forward and gave the pieces
of the god into Danlo's hands. 'I'm sorry I can't accept your
gift.'
  'I am sorry, too,' Danlo said. His breath burst into steam
the moment it touched the cold air falling over him. Tiny
snowflakes broke against his eyes, and his face was burning
with cold. Every cell of his body was cold, yet burning, too,
with Hanuman's secret gift that he would never forget.
  'You should go now,' Hanuman said. He covered his face
against the snowy air sifting down over the altar. The storm
has returned – this late it might be difficult to call for a
sled.'
  'What do you mean telling Danlo that he should leave?' Bardo
suddenly asked. He glowered at Hanuman, then sighed with great
force. 'Is it upon you to ask him to leave?'
  Hanuman gestured toward Surya Lal and Mariam Erendira
Vasquez; he bowed to all the Ringists. To Bardo he said, 'Do
you think it's appropriate that they should have to share this
night with someone who doesn't follow our Way?'
  Everyone was now looking at Bardo. Hanuman was concentrating
his whole awareness on Bardo's soft eyes, staring at him as a
cat stares at a mouse. 'Ah, no,' Bardo said. 'I suppose it's
inappropriate.'
 'Then perhaps we should ask Danlo to leave.'
  Bardo hesitated as he rubbed his beard. Then he said, 'Ah,
why don't you ask him?' He smiled at Danlo weakly, distantly,
as if to say that he was sorry, and Danlo wondered what spell
Hanuman had cast over him.
 'All right,' Hanuman said. He turned to Danlo, and his
 842
 eyes were full of light, full of himself. 'Please leave.'
Danlo bowed and said, 'If you would like.'
 'Never return here. It would be wrong for you to do so.'
  'You should leave, too,' Danlo said. He looked at Lais
Motega Mohammad and Thomas Rane and Rohana Chang; he had
everyone's attention, so he spoke the truth of his worst fear.
'All of you. The Way of Ringess ... is like a fever waiting to
break out upon the universe. It will destroy you. You should
leave before it is too late.'
  Danlo moved down the altar steps, and his boots sent pieces
of glass tinkling against each other. As before, people moved
out of his way, allowing him to pass. They regarded him with
something like awe, but there was also guilt and anger in their
admiration for him, as if they sensed they should turn their
backs on him and not meet his eyes. Some, with cotton swabs and
tubes of glue that Bardo sent for, were wiping drops of blood
from their robes and tending each other's wounds; many more
were looking toward Hanuman, wondering what to do. Just before
leaving the cathedral, beneath the nested arches of the
doorway, Danlo turned and looked back behind him. Hanuman stood
alone on the altar. Snow swirled around him and broke up the
radiation of the candles so that he seemed enveloped in a
sphere of golden light. His face was hard and implacable, and
it shouted, Never return here, never! Danlo looked deep into
the nave, then, and he looked through time as well as space.
The nave – the whole cathedral from wall to wall – was full of
thousands of people, all of them facing the altar, all of them
swaying and chanting and shouting in ecstasy. There was light
everywhere, coming not from candles set afire, but streaming in
through the windows in lovely parallel lines of emerald and
blue. He saw himself standing on the altar next to Hanuman,
bathed in this beautiful light. He saw himself dressed in a
black pilot's robe, tall and powerful and burning with
compassion – yet it was not himself but only some other man who
bore slight resemblance to the person he
843
 knew as Danlo the Wild. Even as he fell out of this moment of
scrying – in the suddenness of broken glass and wind – he
thought that he would never set foot inside the cathedral
again. One last time, he bowed to Hanuman. But Hanuman did not
see him. Around Hanuman's head the clearface shone like a
glowing skull. Now and forever more, he would be imprisoned
inside his own skull; he was like a brilliant star about to
begin the final collapse into himself, into that crushing
singularity of consciousness from which there is no return.
I have created him, Danlo thought.
  As he turned to pass through the cathedral's great doors, he
felt the jagged pieces of the broken god cutting his hand, and
he wondered why he had done what he had done.
844
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

Danlo Peacewise

 Before, you are wise; after, you are wise. In between you are
otherwise.
 – Fravashi saying (from the formularies of Osho the Fool)

 The first day of midwinter spring in the year 2954 arrived
inauspiciously in a fury of snow and darkness that it seemed
would never end. None – except the scryers – might have
foreseen that this new year would be a glorious and fateful
time in history, as crucial to the evolution of the Order as
had been 908, or the Dark Year, or 2326, when Dario the Bold
discovered the dead stars of the Vild. Not even Danlo could
have known that the strange happenings in Bardo's cathedral
would set off an avalanche of decisions leading the radical
historians, eventually, to rename 2954 as 'First Year' and to
remake their calendars. The great changes began with a
seemingly minor event: Lord Pali, upon the urging of alarmed
academicians in both the Masters' and Lords' Colleges, banished
Hanuman li Tosh from the Order. With the breaking of the god,
Hanuman at last had flouted too many people's sensibilities and
had compelled too much notice. He had violated several canons
as well as betraying his cetic ethics, and so Lord Pall forbade
Hanuman to use any of the Order's libraries or to dine at any
of the Order's restaurants, and most importantly, he forbade
him ever again to cross the Academy walls. In spirit, of
course, Hanuman had long since left the Order, so his dismissal
caused him no real regret or shame. He must have been secretly
glad to be free of
845
his vows, free to imprint his designs on a new religion.
Although he pretended to outrage, he and Lord Pall were still
playing a deep game with each other. It is impossible to say
whether they intended, at this time, to make Ring-ism the
religion of the Order; but certainly they conspired to bring
down each other's enemies. On 10th day – while Bardo was
preoccupied designing the window that would replace the one
broken on Year's End Night – Hanuman approached Bardo with a
simple, if subtle, plan to reorganize their church. Hanuman
proposed formalizing the status of the Way's inner circle. All
Ringists who had recorded their remembrances of the Elder Eddas
into one of Hanuman's computers would henceforth be known as
'Elders'. While Bardo naturally mistrusted any scheme springing
from Hanuman's lips or brain, this appealed to his vanity.
Bardo would be seen as the great priest of a universal
religion, the bestower of the titles and boons upon those who
had been most faithful to him. (It never struck him as absurd
that very shortly young journeymen, with their golden robes and
pimply faces, would skate about the City demanding to be
addressed as 'Elder Lais' or 'Elder Kiku' and that they would
make these demands even of older masters who had lived several
lifetimes.) And so Bardo approved Hanuman's suggestion and went
back to choosing plates of glass for his window. So it happened
that Lord Mariam Erendira Vasquez, one of the finest lords ever
to serve the Order, came to be called 'Elder Mariam'. This
title was to ruin her. The Order's 44th canon, while allowing
choice of religious belief, prohibited all who had taken vows
from holding formal position in any religion, cult or
ideological movement. In a ruthless act that stunned the whole
Order, Lord Pall invoked the letter of this canon and banished
Lord Vasquez, along with Thomas Rane, Huang li Wood and several
other prominent masters whom he must have regarded as stones in
his boot. Of the four original members of the Tetrad (Chanoth
Chen Ciceron died quietly in his bed shortly after the Festival
of
846
the Broken Dolls) only Lord Nikolos now remained to oppose
Audric Pall's lordship of the Order.
   Then the Lord cetic delivered his final, brilliant stroke.
On 19th day, he convened the entire Lords' College and called
for a vote over the final planning of the Vild mission. For
years, the faction of lords who were loyal to him had
forestalled this planning. They – the score of old, fearful
lords who were loath to divide the Order and throw it into
chaos – had voted repeatedly against provisioning the many
lightships and deepships such a mission would require. But on
18th night, in a secret meeting in the cetics' tower, Lord Pall
plied them with rare and potent teas, and he soothed their
fears. He reasoned with them; he made them promises. He pointed
out that the Vild mission would attract the Order's malcontents
and mavericks, and many disruptive personages whom they would
be well rid of. In fact, he requested the old lords to present
him with lists of those they considered most worthy of the
honour of risking their lives in the perilous journey to the
Vild. This purge would cleanse the Order, he said, not weaken
it. Just as it would strengthen their eternal Order if there
was again a single lord who ruled over it. And so the next day
the Lords' College convened in their cold, draughty building to
decide the fate of many billion stars and the billion billion
human beings who lived around them. By secret ballot, the one
hundred and nineteen lords cast their votes and at last the
great Second Vild Mission came to pass. While the lords sat
around their tables and exchanged quick words of jubilation and
surprise, Lord Pall stood to address them. For the first time
in fifty years, he deigned to speak without hand signs in his
natural voice. 'My Lords,' he gasped out in a stream of breath
that rattled and hissed, 'I would like to propose that Nikolos
Sar Petrosian be installed as Lord of the Mission. There is no
one more able to lead it than he.'
   To lead the mission, of course, Lord Nikolos would have to
quit the Tetrad. This he soon did. Although he must
847
have dreaded leaving the Order to be ruled once again by an
ancient, autocratic lord – after all it was he who had
organized the schism against the Timekeeper twenty years
previously – it had always been his dream to establish a second
Academy among the shattered stars of the Vild. He completed the
final plans for the mission with the same speed and
decisiveness that had ultimately brought down the Timekeeper.
For seventy days the sky above the City was full of rocket fire
and thunder as the ferries lifted factories, robots, computers,
libraries, diamond tunnellers and other tools of assembler
technology – and a million other things – up to the ten
deep-ships that orbited the planet. Beside them, floating in
the darkness of near-space above the atmosphere, three great,
gleaming seedships awaited their passengers. To fill these
ships and make the long journey to the Vild, Lord Nikolos chose
eschatologists, mechanics, holists, historians and even cetics
– a thousand masters and adepts from among all the professions.
Many of these men and women, during the schism of the Pilots'
War, had left Neverness once before. Many more were put forth
by Lord Pall, who had compiled a long list of notorious
Ordermen, including famous pilots who once had followed Mallory
Ringess to war: Helena Charbo, Aja, Richardess, Alark of
Urradeth and perhaps the greatest living pilot of all, the
Sonderval. First on Lord Pall's list, however, was a young
pilot of little distinction. Lord Nikolos must have wondered
why the name of Danlo wi Soli Ringess appeared before all
others. He must have hesitated in choosing Danlo for such a
mission, for Danlo was only a journeyman and therefore deemed
too inexperienced to pilot a fragile lightship through the
deranged and unmapped spaces of the Vild. But three things
weighed in Danlo's favour. First, he was almost a full pilot;
at times of crisis, according to a precedent established during
the War of the Faces, a promising journeyman could be elevated
before his formal convocation. Then, too, Lord Nikolos liked it
that Danlo had spoken so fiercely and
848
eloquently against the Way of Ringess. Lord Nikolos had a mind
as flawless and clear as winter air; he might have been better
off born thousands of years earlier into the Age of Reason, so
keenly did he mistrust man's dark, moist, intuitive energies.
Ironically, he regarded Danlo as a champion of the rational,
and like himself, as a hater of all that was religious or that
hinted of the occult. The Vild mission would be, essentially, a
war of reason against the galaxy-destroying doctrines of the
Architects of the Old Cybernetic Church. Danlo, steeped in the
Fravashi language philosophy, the enemy of all beliefs or
belief systems, was a man whom Lord Nikolos thought he could
trust. Lord Nikolos also assumed that since Danlo was the son
and grandson of great pilots, one day he would be a great pilot
too. And so in the end he approved Danlo as a member of his
mission. In this way, through chance, through fate, through
fundamental misunderstandings, after eight years of waiting to
journey to the stars, Danlo at last prepared to leave the city
of Neverness.
  He took his vows on the second of false winter. Since he was
the only journeyman to be elevated that day, the ceremony was
held privately inside the Hall of the Ancient Pilots, in a
little room without windows or furniture. The floor, save for a
single old carpet laid out like a beggar's bed, was bare stone.
The walls were cold and grey, broken only by portraits of the
men and women who had served as Lord Pilot. On the room's north
wall, the likeness of Mallory Ringess hung between those of
Leopold Soli and Chanoth Chen Ciceron. Next to Lord Ciceron's
nobly (and falsely) rendered face was only empty granite;
someday this space would be filled by the portrait of the new
Lord Pilot, Salmalin the Prudent. Salmalin was a spare, laconic
man who had been installed as Lord Pilot only ten days earlier.
One of his first duties was to preside over Danlo's elevation.
Attended by only two other pilots as witnesses, he performed
the ceremony quickly, as if he were a guest at an alien banquet
forced to make a speech or eat a dis-
849
 tasteful dish. He stood all stiff and sullen in his black
robes while Danlo knelt on the carpet and made his vows. Then
Lord Salmalin presented Danlo with a black diamond ring and
told him, 'With this ring, you are a pilot.' That was all he
said. He offered neither congratulations nor encouragement. He
bowed, turned abruptly, and left Danlo musing that he had
finally accomplished his dream of becoming a full pilot.
  Over the next ten days, as the storms of midwinter spring
gave way to warmer and fairer weather, he went about the City
saying his farewells. He had many people to visit: Madhava li
Shing, Rihana Tal, and Jonathan and Benjamin Hur, and many
other friends. During his years of religious exploration, he
had met autists, nimspinners, ronin warrior-poets – women and
men of a dozen sects. He found most of these people down in the
Farsider's Quarter, and he told them that he would soon be
leaving the City for a long time, possibly forever. It
surprised him how difficult this leave-taking proved to be.
Seeking out his old masters, such as Master Jonath who would
not be making the journey to the Vild, he skated across the
Academy from hall to hall, and he savoured the play of sunlight
off the spires, the cut and set of each building stone, the
music of the novices' skate blades ringing against the ice.
From a friend, he learned that Thomas Rane would be moving into
one of the apartments adjacent to Bardo's cathedral. Therefore
he made his last journey to the Tower of Remembrance where he
watched Master Thomas pack various drugs, gyres, attitude pins
and other belongings into a plain wooden box. His final meeting
with him was awkward and sad. Danlo showed him his pilot's
ring, and Master Thomas said, 'Congratulations, Danlo. But I
hope you'll continue learning the attitudes, even if I won't be
there to teach you. You would have made a fine remembrancer,
don't you know?'
  Danlo said goodbye to him then. But he did not tell him that
since the night in Bardo's cathedral, he had lost his
850
passion for remembrance. In truth, during the dark and endless
days of the great storm, the golden door to the One Memory had
slammed shut with such force and reverberation that he thought
he would never again find the key with which to open it.
 On the 12th of false winter he met Bardo down on the Street
of a Thousand Bars. Because Bardo did not wish to be seen
talking to Danlo, for their rendezvous he chose a dark bar that
was more like an animal's lair than a place in which two
friends might enjoy conversation. Over cups of tarry, liquorice
coffee, as they stood side by side at the ancient bar, Bardo
professed that they were still friends, even if their
friendship had suffered over his founding the Way of Ringess.
He made no apologies to Danlo. He hinted that he was caught up
in momentous events, or rather, that he was playing some sort
of cosmic chess game too important for him to simply knock over
the pieces and quit. That he could still quit, at will, Danlo
doubted, even though Bardo pretended to a control over himself
that he had never possessed. Indeed, Bardo's words that night
were full of pretension, self-deception and lies. He blamed the
difficulties of his church on Hanuman's overweening ambition
instead of looking into the smoke-stained mirror on the wall
behind the bar (or any other mirror) for the source of his
woes. If only Hanuman could be whipped and disciplined like a
sled dog, he said, the Way of Ringess might achieve true
salvation for all people.
  'It's Hanuman who's ruined everything,' Bardo said. Although
he had sipped only coffee for his beverage, he seemed
half-drunk. 'Ah, but what can I do? Threaten to excommunicate
him? Yes, yes, of course, the thing to do – except I've already
done it. Threatened him. And his response was to threaten me.
No, don't be alarmed, there's no need. I hope. I mean, he
threatened to leave the Way. To found his own goddamned church
and take half my Ringists with him. Half? Three fourths. Nine
tenths – does it matter? He threatened to ruin what I've
created. And so
851
I must find a way to control him. His genius – he's a goddamned
religious genius. Did you know that the courtesans have finally
agreed to follow the Way? The whole damn Society! Because of
him. How can I do without him? How can I not? Ah, Bardo, Bardo
– what has Bardo done, you may wonder? Are you listening,
Little Fellow? I remember that I once warned you not to make
friends with him. I should have heeded my own advice. Too bad.
There's something wrong about Hanuman, I think. Something
ill-fated, even sinister. Did you know that he was seen with
Tamara the night before she supposedly contracted the goddamned
virus? Before this virus supposedly raped her of her memories?
Supposedly – what a weight of meaning I impregnate that word
with. Do you understand? You do? Ah, you do. Now I understand.
It's clear what happened in the cathedral. You could have
killed him. Yet you saved him. Why? Because of your vow? Or
because you had no proof of his filthy crime? No proof. But
somewhere there has to be proof. Do you think I won't find it?
And then. And then. Ah, and then you don't care, do you?'
 'It is not that,' Danlo said. He sipped his coffee while he
kicked at the steel foot rail and listened to it ring. That
Bardo had ferreted out evidence of Hanuman's crime surprised
him only slightly.
'You've no taste for revenge?'
'No,' Danlo said.
'Too bad. And it's too bad what's happened to Tamara.'
'Have you seen her, Bardo?'
 There was a long silence as Bardo pulled at his moustache.
Then he sighed and said, 'Listen, I bring you heavy news. I've
heard from the courtesans that she's left the City. She's
renounced the Society, abandoned her calling. She's gone, and
no one knows where. Out to the stars. I'm sorry – you'll have
wanted to call on her before your journey.'
 Danlo shook his head and looked at Bardo. 'No ... we have
already said goodbye.'
852
'Well, perhaps she'll return, someday.'
'Perhaps.'
  'Ah, poor Tamara. Poor Danlo.' Bardo turned to preen Ms
beard and study his reflection in the dark mirror behind the
bar. His face fell sad and dreamy, full of self-pity. Then he
mumbled, 'Poor Bardo. What shall we do? Do you think it doesn't
matter? No, it matters. Everything. I, you, Hanuman li Tosh –
the Way. Have you ever doubted there's truly a way for us to
become gods? There is a way. I've seen it, the Elder Eddas.
Mallory Ringess. His genius. His life. His fate. His way. Have
I ever understood why he did what he did? No. Did he instruct
me to found a goddamned religion? If only he'd remained in
Neverness. But someday he'll return. I have to believe that,
don't I?'
  Danlo smiled at him through a haze of smoke and steaming
coffee. 'Oh, Bardo ... I shall miss you,' he said.
  'Well, it's all too damn bad,' Bardo said. He banged his
coffee mug down on the bar, then embraced Danlo and thumped his
hand against his back. 'Little Fellow, Little Fellow.'
'Goodbye,' Danlo said.
  'I wish you well,' Bardo said. He squeezed Danlo's hand and
looked down at the black ring circling his little finger. 'Fall
far and well, Pilot.'
  It was three days after this that Danlo made a brief journey
across the City. With a symmetry he found pleasing, his final
farewell was with the master who had first greeted him upon his
arrival in Neverness: the Honoured Fravashi called Old Father.
This wise, ancient alien – ever one to savour irony – suggested
they meet on the very beach where Danlo had almost speared him
so many years before. On a cloudy false winter day, Danlo went
down to the Darghinni Sands and waited by the ocean for Old
Father's arrival. He stood on hard-formed sand shingled with
chunks of pack ice, and he stared out at the dark waters of the
Sound for a long time. Then, from behind him, far off, he heard
a faint whistling as of air flowing
853
through fipple pipes. He turned to see a small white figure
trudging across the dunes. It was Old Father, of course,
dressed only in his body's silky white fur. As he drew nearer,
Danlo could see that Old Father's arthritis must have worsened,
for there was little grace left in his long alien limbs, and he
moved carefully across the black and white sands as if stepping
over shards of broken glass. Although he was obviously in pain,
his mouth was shaped into a deep smile; his marvellous golden
eyes shone down upon Danlo like double suns.
 'Ah ho!' he said, 'it's Danlo the Wild, not so wild any more,
I think. You've changed – you're a man now. So, it's so.'
  Indeed, Danlo's appearance had recently changed. He had
shaved his face until it was as smooth as the skin of a baldo
nut. He had trimmed his long fingernails. Then, after
unfastening Ahira's white feather and storing it inside his
chest along with the broken chess piece and his mother's
diamond sphere, and other mementos, he had cut his hair.
Despite these mutilations, however, despite all that had
happened to him since the Devaki had died, he could not think
of himself as a full man.
  To Old Father, Danlo said, 'It is good to see you, sir. You
seem ... much the same.'
  'Ahhh,' Old Father said. 'Ohhh – the same, only more so.'
  'Perhaps we should have found a meeting-place closer to your
house. It must be hard for you ... to walk this far.'
   'Oh ho, it is hard,' Old Father said. With his black
fingernails, he scratched the great double membrum dangling
between his legs, then touched his hips. 'When I was younger, I
tried to flee the pain by sitting and doing nothing. But that
only made me more aware of it. Therefore, let us walk down by
the water, and you will tell me about your pains so that I may
forget about mine. It's a lovely day for walking, don't you
think?'
854
  Together, arm in arm, scuttling along like two crabs who had
locked claws, they walked down by the water's edge. There was a
brisk wind blowing off the sea. The air was heavy with salt and
the reek of rotting wood. And with other smells, too: bird
droppings and crushed shells and old, wet fur. They stepped
over strands of crackling seaweed and driftwood bent into
deranged shapes, and Danlo told Old Father all that had
happened between him and Hanuman li Tosh. He had much to tell.
Even at their crustacean pace, they walked a long way, almost
to the end of the Darghinni Sands where the dunes gave way to
the rugged shoreline of Far North Beach. It was an afternoon of
darting clouds and wind. Snow fell in sudden flurries followed
moments later by bursts of sunshine. Delicate little snowflakes
– which Danlo once would have called shishay – hung suspended
in the air only to be vaporized before striking the ground.
Faced with this uncertain weather, Danlo could not decide if he
was hot or cold. But Old Father seemed completely in his
element. Neither the snow nor the spray off the breakers
dismayed him. He liked to dig his furry feet into the hardpack,
leaving footprints larger than a bear's. As Danlo told him how
Hanuman had broken the god that he had carved, Old Father
played in the sand and his little black nose quivered happily.
 'Ah, oh, you were right to keep your vow of ahimsa,' Old
Father said.
  Danlo listened to the waves breaking against the shore, and
he said, 'Every moment since I gave Hanuman the god ... I have
wondered if that is true.'
  'Aha, never harming another, not even in one's thoughts.'
'But I did harm him,' Danlo said. 'I saw him ... dead.'
'Oh?'
'I wanted to kill him.'
'Ahhh, but instead you saved his life. So, it's so.'
'Yes,' Danlo said, 'it is so.'
855
  Old Father smiled as one of his eyes shut halfway. He
whistled and said, 'You shouldn't judge yourself, oh, no! You
saved his life. In the field of action, you were a man of
ahimsa, and I honour you for this.'
  Old Father's insistence that he had saved Hanuman's life did
nothing to ease Danlo's doubts. In fact, his words were like
salt in the open wound that divided Danlo in two. With his
thumb, Danlo massaged the bone above his eye; there was an
aching in his head, now, nearly all the time. 'I think it is
still your delight to inflict the holy pain,' he said.
 'Oh ho, the angslan!' Old Father said. 'Am I not still a
Fravashi?'
'More so than ever, sir.'
  'And you're still human, I see. This new religion of yours
has done nothing to change that.' Old Father's face was radiant
with sunshine, and both his eyes were now wide open. 'It's a
tradition that we Fravashi give gifts to human beings. Once, on
this very beach, I gave you a gift. Do you remember?'
  Danlo nodded as he reached down to slip the shakuhachi from
his pocket. He held up the bamboo flute so that the sunlight
glinted from it.
 'Aha!' Old Father said. 'And now I wish to give you another
gift.'
 Except for his shining fur, Old Father was completely naked,
and he held nothing in his long, fine hands. His gift then,
would be no musical instrument or other thing wrought of wood
or ivory or stone.
 'There's a title,' Old Father said, 'by which certain of the
Fravashi Fathers are known. This I give to you, from my lips to
your ears: I shall call you "Danlo Peacewise". Oh ho, you are
wise in the ways of peace, and you'll wear the name well.'
'Thank you,' Danlo said. 'But I do not feel very wise.'
'Ahhh.'
'Nor am I at peace.'
856
'Ohhh.'
  'At least, I cannot be at peace ... with what I have made.'
  'Do you mean with this religion that everyone is calling the
Way of Ringess?'
 Danlo hadn't meant precisely that, but he said, 'I have
spoken against the Way, you know.'
  'I would imagine so. Many of the Peacewise are great
speakers.'
 'But I am afraid what I have said has caused ... great harm.'
  'Never harming anyone – this is ahimsa,' Old Father said.
'Oh, ho, but freeing others from their beliefs – this is the
holy task.'
 'This belief in the way my father became a god – I would
destroy it if I could. All beliefs. All ... religions.'
  Old Father stood quietly with both his eyes nearly closed.
It seemed that he was staring out across the Sound at the
mountains, whose white peaks were now lost into layers of puffy
white clouds. 'Oh, Pilot, you must be careful,' Old Father
finally said. There is a union of opposites: the stronger your
will to destroy a thing, the more tightly you'll bind yourself
to it.'
 'But it was you who taught me,' Danlo said. To oppose all
beliefs, yes?'
'Ha, ha, I think I taught you too well.'
 Danlo stood watching the waves come and go. The tide was
going out, moment by moment, slipping away into the deeper
parts of the sea. After a while, the sky fell cloudy and grey,
and the waters of the Sound were as dark and turbid with
sediments as old wine. As he listened to the far off barking of
the seals and the gulls screaming and circling above the waves,
he was aware that a whole part of his life was ending. He could
no longer be a student of alien philosophies, or dreamscapes,
or techniques of remembrance. Here, on this cold beach, he
would try at last to stand beneath the universe naked in the
mind without
857
 beliefs. He would will himself to do this, even if Old Father
thought that such a way of living was impossible for any man.
'Danlo, Danlo.'
  He turned to see Old Father standing next to him, touching
the shaft of his shakuhachi. Old Father smiled at him as if he
were reading his thoughts.
 'You can't give up everything,' Old Father said. 'What of
your devotion to ahimsa?'
  'But there is no devotion,' Danlo said. 'Ahimsa is not what
I believe. It is ... what I am.'
  Old Father whistled sadly and said, 'At our first meeting
you told me that you wished to journey to the centre of the
universe. A noble conception, don't you think?'
  Danlo shook his head. 'No, it is ... a childish view. The
universe goes on and on. There is no centre.'
'But you will go to the Vild?'
'Yes.'
  'Oh, ho, to find a cure for the plague that killed the
Devaki?'
  With an uncharacteristic urgency, Old Father hummed a
strange little melody that Danlo had never heard before. Old
Father's right eye was entirely closed while the left searched
Danlo's face with the intensity of a moonlight.
 'Once, I believed the slow evil could be cured,' Danlo
admitted. 'I believed the Alaloi could be saved.'
'Once it was also your desire to become an asarya.'
 'That is your word,' Danlo said. 'Affirming everything ... is
a Fravashi ideal.'
'Ah, oh, then it's no longer your ideal?'
  Danlo stepped out a few paces toward the water until the
surging waves began lapping at his boots. The problem,' he
said, 'is to affirm anything.'
'So, it's so.'
  'Do you see?' Danlo said. He pointed toward the offshore
rocks that pushed like granite needles into the sky. Sheets of
feather moss covered them in green. Everywhere, they
858
were speckled white with snow gulls resting or making their
nests. 'It is all so beautiful. But so flawed. With shaida. The
mountains, myself. Even you, sir – we are all a part. There is
no escaping it. I think that Hanuman understood this more
clearly than anyone should.'
'And you can't forgive him for this, can you?'
 'No ... I cannot forgive myself.'
'Ahhh.'
 'I used to hope that there was a way out in remembrancing. A
way towards ... an innocence.'
'Then you never found the answer in the Elder Eddas?'
  'Once, I thought I did,' Danlo said. 'I was so close. But
... no.'
  '"Shaida is the cry of the world",' Old Father said, quoting
a line from the Song of Life that Danlo had once taught him.
'Aha, but you didn't make the world.'
 With a habitual motion, Danlo reached up to touch the feather
in his hair, but he found that it was gone. He bowed to Old
Father, then said, 'Shaida is the way of the man who kills
other men. There was a man who Hanuman might have become. A
truly splendid man. And I... killed him.'
'And you find it impossible to accept this murder.'
'I am sorry, sir. I must ... disappoint you.'
 Old Father smiled mysteriously and said, 'No, it's just the
opposite.'
 They stood there in the wet sand, looking at each other and
smiling. It was now past late afternoon; in the west, out where
the ocean ran fast and deep, the clouds had pulled back to
reveal the blazing sun as it spread out along the horizon. The
sky was on fire, melting, and the waters burned with crimson
and gold. Because it would soon be dark and the Fravashi do not
like to be outside at night, Old Father made ready to leave. He
placed his fingers on Danlo's flute one last time. He whistled
a quick song of blessing. (Or perhaps it was a ribald aria –
with the Fravashi, one never knew.) And then he opened both
eyes com-
859
pletely and said to Danlo, 'But how will you live now, Pilot?
Oh, ho, what will you do?'
  Danlo pointed toward the eastern sky, at the night's first
stars twinkling between the breaks in the clouds. There are
gods out there,' he said. 'Perhaps my father still lives ...
somewhere. I would find him if I could. Any god. There is a
question that Hanuman once asked me – my question, now: I would
ask the gods if the universe could have been made differently.
Halla, not shaida. The gods know. The gods create, on and on,
and so they must know.'
  Soon, he said, he would go out into the universe, not to
find its centre nor to discover a cure for a disease that had
no cure, but simply because he was a pilot of the Order on a
desperate quest. The stars were dying, and even if there was no
help for the world's evil, at least the destruction of the
entire galaxy might be averted.
  Old Father's response to Danlo's words was strange. His eyes
were open yet devoid of light, as if his consciousness had
slipped away from him and flown up toward the sky. Although he
stood three feet away on the sand of a darkening beach, he
seemed to be looking down on Danlo, even while looking
intensely at himself. His mouth was set into a sad smile that
told of painful and elusive memories, or perhaps a vision of a
future that had never been. There was a vast coldness about
him. It seemed that he wanted to tell Danlo something. But for
once – and only for a moment – this Old Father of the Fravashi
race could not speak.
 'Sir ... it is falling late,' Danlo said.
  At last, the great tide of consciousness rushed back in to
Old Father's eyes, and he whistled softly. 'Ohhh, very late –
we should say goodbye. It may be a long time before we walk
here again.'
 Danlo bowed his head, looking down at the tiny black and
white grains of sand beneath his boots. 'I think ... I will
never return,' he said.
860
'Then I must ask you to give me a gift before we go,' Old
Father said.
 'But what do I have to give you?' Old Father looked at Danlo's
flute. 'Why not a song?'
'What ... song?'
 'Something that you've composed yourself. Something strange
and wild, yet peaceful. Oh, ho, you are Danlo Peacewise, are
you not?'
  Danlo smiled as he shrugged his shoulders. He held the
shakuhachi's cool ivory mouthpiece to his lips and began to
play. A stream of long, low notes flowed out over the beach. He
had to play strongly with much breath or else the music would
have been lost to the wind. It was a simple song really, a song
that returned to itself over and over with subtle variations in
each round. He might play it forever and not reach any
conclusion or climax, yet, in the poignant passages and
movements, there was a progression toward a completeness of
sound that hinted of infinite possibilities. Old Father
listened to this song with his head held rigid and his eyes
nearly closed, in the attitude of a Fravashi who wishes to
remember a piece of music perfectly. He appeared well-pleased
with the composition. At last, realizing that Danlo had no
intention of stopping, during the pause between rounds, he
reached out to touch Danlo's forehead. And then he announced,
'Oh, ho, I must go now, but you must play. Ha ha, oh ho, you
were born to play.'
  In this way, Old Father said goodbye to his favourite
student. He whistled and smiled and laughed, and then he turned
to make the long walk back to his home. The sound of his
laughter – rich, compassionate, and overflowing – rang out
above the beach sands for a long time. Strangely, it did not
interfere at all with the music that Danlo made.
  All during twilight Danlo stood alone by the water's edge,
playing his shakuhachi. After a while it grew dark and cold.
The wind blew the clouds away, and the sky fell through the
colours of deep blue until it was as black as a
861
pilot's robe. In a great circle all around him, from east to
west, north to south, the stars glittered in the heavens. He
looked up at these cold, bright stars, and the sound of the
song that he played was lost into the immense light-distances.
The familiar constellations that he had known since childhood
were impossibly far away, yet they appeared very near, almost
as near as the luminous waves rushing at his feet. He played
and played, and Old Father's last question reverberated inside
him: what would he do? He listened to the ocean's long, dark
roar as he waited for an answer. He might wait forever, for
that was the marvel and mystery of the ocean, the way it
shimmered in the starlight, always waiting, always the same,
yet always moving, always calling, always astonishing with new
sounds and creations. Although it was now full dark, he
listened for the cries of the various sea birds, the loons and
gulls and puffins, and the silver thallows and other hunters
who liked to fly at night. He listened for the rare song of the
snowy owl. At last, in the neverness of this one sound that he
longed for above all others, in the thunderous silence of the
sea, he had his answer. He would continue to play his own song
and no other. He would look clearly upon all that he had done.
He had created Hanuman – this was a truth of the universe too
terrible to deny. And Hanuman had created him. The difficulty
now, as it ever would be, was in saying 'yes' to such broken,
hateful creations. But if he were strong enough, if he were
wise enough, he could do one simple thing. He could affirm the
act of creating, in itself. The miracle of simply living. Life,
he remembered, was everything. One day he might laugh again, or
find completion in love, but now it must be enough for him to
live, on and on without end.
 And so on a lovely night he stood alone by the water's edge
as he lifted his face to the stars and played a song on his
shakuhachi. And he played and played and played.
862


Scanned by Roh Eryn 2003
Proofed by reb
Version 1.0 – Jan 13, 2004

